================================================================================
RESQ-AI EMERGENCY MEDICAL REFERENCE GUIDE
================================================================================

This document contains emergency medical information from:
  - Emergency Medicine.pdf
  - Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED Instructor Manual (2016).pdf
  - Dermatology Handbook for medical students 2nd Edition 2014 Final2(2).pdf
  - Home_Emergency_Book.pdf.pdf
  - First Aid USMLE Step 2.pdf

================================================================================


################################################################################
# SECTION 1: EMERGENCY MEDICINE PROTOCOLS
# Source: Emergency Medicine.pdf
################################################################################

OXFORD MEDICAL PUBLICATIONS

Oxford Handbook of
Emergency
Medicine
Published and forthcoming Oxford Handbooks
Oxford Handbook for the Foundation Programme 3e
Oxford Handbook of Acute Medicine 3e
Oxford Handbook of Anaesthesia 3e
Oxford Handbook of Applied Dental Sciences
Oxford Handbook of Cardiology 2e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical and Laboratory Investigation 3e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Dentistry 5e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Diagnosis 2e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Examination and Practical Skills
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Haematology 3e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Immunology and Allergy 2e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine - Mini Edition 8e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine 8e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Pharmacy
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Rehabilitation 2e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Specialties 8e
Oxford Handbook of Clinical Surgery 3e
Oxford Handbook of Complementary Medicine
Oxford Handbook of Critical Care 3e
Oxford Handbook of Dental Patient Care 2e
Oxford Handbook of Dialysis 3e
Oxford Handbook of Emergency Medicine 4e
Oxford Handbook of Endocrinology and Diabetes 2e
Oxford Handbook of ENT and Head and Neck Surgery
Oxford Handbook of Expedition and Wilderness Medicine
Oxford Handbook of Forensic Medicine
Oxford Handbook of Gastroenterology & Hepatology 2e
Oxford Handbook of General Practice 3e
Oxford Handbook of Genetics
Oxford Handbook of Genitourinary Medicine, HIV and AIDS 2e
Oxford Handbook of Geriatric Medicine
Oxford Handbook of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology
Oxford Handbook of Key Clinical Evidence
Oxford Handbook of Medical Dermatology
Oxford Handbook of Medical Sciences
Oxford Handbook of Medical Statistics
Oxford Handbook of Nephrology and Hypertension
Oxford Handbook of Neurology
Oxford Handbook of Nutrition and Dietetics
Oxford Handbook of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 2e
Oxford Handbook of Occupational Health
Oxford Handbook of Oncology 3e
Oxford Handbook of Ophthalmology 2e
Oxford Handbook of Paediatrics
Oxford Handbook of Pain Management
Oxford Handbook of Palliative Care 2e
Oxford Handbook of Practical Drug Therapy 2e
Oxford Handbook of Pre-Hospital Care
Oxford Handbook of Psychiatry 2e
Oxford Handbook of Public Health Practice 2e
Oxford Handbook of Reproductive Medicine & Family Planning
Oxford Handbook of Respiratory Medicine 2e
Oxford Handbook of Rheumatology 3e
Oxford Handbook of Sport and Exercise Medicine
Oxford Handbook of Tropical Medicine 3e
Oxford Handbook of Urology 2e
Oxford Handbook of
Emergency
Medicine
Fourth edition

Jonathan P. Wyatt
Consultant in Emergency Medicine and
Forensic Physician
Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro, UK

Robin N. Illingworth
Consultant in Emergency Medicine
St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UK

Colin A. Graham
Professor of Emergency Medicine
Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China

Kerstin Hogg
Clinical Research Fellow,
The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Canada
with senior international advisors:
Michael J. Clancy
Consultant in Emergency Medicine
Southampton General Hospital,
Southampton, UK
Colin E. Robertson
Professor of Emergency Medicine
Royal Inﬁrmary, Edinburgh, UK

1
1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Oxford University Press, 2012
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First edition published 1999
Second edition published 2005
Third edition published 2006
Fourth edition published 2012
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication-Data
Data available
Typeset by Cenveo, Bangalore, India
Printed in Italy
on acid-free paper by
L.E.G.O. S.p.A.—Lavis TN
ISBN 978–0–19–958956–2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Oxford University Press makes no representation, express or implied, that the
drug dosages in this book are correct. Readers must therefore always check the
product information and clinical procedures with the most up-to-date published
product information and data sheets provided by the manufacturers and the most
recent codes of conduct and safety regulations. The authors and publishers do not
accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the text or for the misuse or
misapplication of material in this work. Except where otherwise stated, drug dosages
and recommendations are for the non-pregnant adult who is not breastfeeding.
         Dedicated to Dr Robin Mitchell (1964–2010)
 Emergency Physician in Christchurch, Edinburgh and Auckland.
Outstanding clinician and teacher, tremendous colleague and friend.
This page intentionally left blank
                                     vii

   Contents

   Abbreviations and symbols ix
   Normal values xvii
   Acknowledgements xix

 1 General approach                    1
 2 Life-threatening emergencies       41
 3 Medicine                           62
 4 Toxicology                        179
 5 Infectious diseases               219
 6 Environmental emergencies         253
 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia         271
 8 Major trauma                      319
 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics   401
10 Surgery                           503
11 Ophthalmology                     533
12 Ear, nose and throat              545
13 Obstetrics and gynaecology        563
14 Psychiatry                        601
15 Paediatric emergencies            630

   Index 737
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                       ix

     Abbreviations and symbols

°        degrees
8        approximately
+ve      positive
–ve      negative
±        plus or minus
i        increase(d)
d        decrease(d)
ABC      airway, breathing, circulation
ABG      arterial blood gas
AC       acromio-clavicular
ACE      angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACTH     adrenocorticotropic hormone
ACS      acute coronary syndrome
AF       atrial ﬁbrillation
AIDS     acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome
AIO      Ambulance incident ofﬁcer
AIS      abbreviated injury scale
ALS      advanced life support
ALT      alanine aminotransferase
ALTE     apparently life-threatening event
AP       antero-posterior
APLS     Advanced Paediatric Life Support
APTT     activated partial thromboplastin time
ARDS     adult respiratory distress syndrome
ARF      acute renal failure
AST      aspartate transaminase
ATLS     advanced trauma life support
AV       atrio-ventricular
bd       twice daily
BKPOP    below knee Plaster of Paris
BKWPOP   below knee walking Plaster of Paris
BLS      basic life support
BMG      bedside strip measurement of venous/capillary blood glucose
BNF      British National Formulary
BNFC     British National Formulary for Children
x   ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS

    BP        blood pressure
    BTS       British Thoracic Society
    BZP       benzylpiperazine
    CBRN      chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear
    CCU       critical care unit
    CK        creatine kinase
    cm        centimetre(s)
    CMV       cytomegalovirus
    CN        chloroacetophenone
    CNS       central nervous system
    CO        carbon monoxide
    CO2       carbon dioxide
    COHb      carboxyhaemoglobin
    COPD      chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
    CPAP      continuous positive airways pressure
    CPR       cardiopulmonary resuscitation
    CRF       chronic renal failure
    CRP       C-reactive protein
    CSF       cerebrospinal ﬂuid
    CT        computed tomography
    CTPA      computed tomography pulmonary angiography
    CVP       central venous pressure
    CVS       cardiovascular system
    CXR       chest X-ray
    DIC       disseminated intravascular coagulation
    DIPJ      distal interphalangeal joint
    DKA       diabetic ketoacidosis
    dL        decilitre
    DPL       diagnostic peritoneal lavage
    DPT       diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus
    DSH       deliberate self-harm
    DVT       deep venous thrombosis
    EBV       Epstein–Barr virus
    ECG       electrocardiogram
    ECT       electroconvulsive therapy
    ED        emergency department
    EEG       electroencephalogram
    EMLA      eutectic mixture of local anaesthetics
    ENT       ear, nose and throat
    EPAP      expiratory positive airway pressure
                              ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS        xi
ESR     erythrocyte sedimentation rate
ET      endotracheal
ETCO2   end-tidal carbon dioxide
FAST    focused assessment with sonography for trauma
FB      foreign body
FBC     full blood count
FFP     fresh frozen plasma
FG      French Gauge
FiO2    inspired oxygen concentration
FOB     faecal occult blood
G6-PD   glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
g       gram(s)
G       gauge
GA      general anaesthetic
GCS     Glasgow Coma Score
GFR     glomerular ﬁltration rate
GI      gastrointestinal
GHB     gammahydroxybutyrate
GMC     General Medical Council
GP      general practitioner
GTN     glyceryl trinitrate
GU      genitourinary
5HT     5-hydroxytryptamine
HATI    human anti-tetanus immunoglobulin
Hb      haemoglobin
HCG     human chorionic gonadotrophin
HCM     hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Hct     haematocrit
HDU     high dependency unit
HHS     hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state
HIV     human immunodeﬁciency virus
HONK    hyperosmolar non-ketotic hyperglycaemia
hr      hour/s
HTLV    human T-cell lymphotropic virus
ICP     intracranial pressure
ICU     intensive care unit
IDDM    insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
IHD     ischaemic heart disease
IM      intramuscular
INR     international normalized ratio (of prothrombin time)
xii   ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS

      IO        intra-osseous
      IPAP      inspiratory positive airway pressure
      IPg       interphalangeal
      IPPV      intermittent positive pressure ventilation
      ISS       injury severity score
      ITP       idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
      IUCD      intrauterine contraceptive device
      IV        intravenous
      IVI       intravenous infusion
      IVRA      intravenous regional anaesthesia
      IVU       intravenous urography
      JVP       jugular venous pressure
      KE        kinetic energy
      kPa       kiloPascal(s) pressure
      KUB       X-ray covering the area of kidneys, ureters and bladder
      L         litre(s)
      LA        local anaesthetic
      LAD       left axis deviation
      LBBB      left bundle branch block
      LDH       lactate dehydrogenase
      LET       lidocaine epinephrine tetracaine
      LFTs      liver function tests
      LMA       laryngeal mask airway
      LMP       last menstrual period
      LMWH      low molecular weight heparin
      LP        lumbar puncture
      LSD       lysergic acid diethylamide
      LV        left ventricular
      LVF       left ventricular failure
      LVH       left venticular hypertrophy
      m         metre(s)
      MAOI      monoamine oxidase inhibitor
      MAST      military anti-shock trousers
      max       maximum
      MC        metacarpal
      MCA       Mental Capacity Act
      MCPJ      metacarpophalangeal joint
      MDU       Medical Defence Union
      MI        myocardial infarction
      min       minute/s
                               ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS   xiii
MIO      medical incident ofﬁcer
mL       millilitre(s)
mmHg     millimetres of mercury pressure
mmol     millimoles
MMR      mumps, measles, and rubella
MRI      magnetic resonance imaging
MRSA     meticillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MS       multiple sclerosis
MSU      mid-stream specimen of urine
MT       metatarsal
MTPJ     metatarsophalangeal joint
MUA      manipulation under anaesthetic
NAC      N-acetyl cysteine
NAI      non-accidental injury
ND       notiﬁable disease
NG       nasogastric
NHS      National Health Service
NIV      non-invasive ventilation
NO       nitrous oxide
NSAID    non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug
NSTEMI   non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction
NWBPOP   non-weight-bearing Plaster of Paris
O2       oxygen
OA       osteoarthritis
OCP      oral contraceptive pill
od       once daily
OPG      orthopantomogram
ORIF     open reduction and internal ﬁxation
ORT      oral replacement therapy
PA       postero-anterior
PACS     picture archiving and communication system
PAN      polyarteritis nodosa
PCI      percutaneous coronary intervention
pCO2     arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide
PCR      polymerase chain reaction
PE       pulmonary embolus
PEA      pulseless electrical activity
PEEP     positive end-expiratory pressure
PEFR     peak expiratory ﬂow rate
PGL      persistent generalized lymphadenopathy
xiv   ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS

      PICU      paediatric intensive care unit
      PID       pelvic inﬂammatory disease
      PIPJ      proximal interphalangeal joint
      PO        per os (orally/by mouth)
      pO2       arterial partial pressure of oxygen
      POP       plaster of Paris
      PPE       personal protective equipment
      PPI       proton pump inhibitor
      PR        per rectum
      PRF       patient report form
      PRN       pro re nata (as required)
      PSP       primary spontaneous pneumothorax
      PV        per vaginam
      qds       four times a day
      RA        rheumatoid arthritis
      RAD       right axis deviation
      RBBB      right bundle branch block
      RBC       red blood cells
      Rh        Rhesus
      ROSC      restoration of spontaneous circulation
      RR        respiratory rate
      RSI       rapid sequence induction/intubation
      RSV       respiratory syncytial virus
      rtPA      recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
      RTS       revised trauma score
      RV        right ventricular
      SA        sino-atrial
      SARS      severe acute respiratory syndrome
      SC        subcutaneous
      SCIWORA   spinal cord injury without radiographic abnormality
      sec       second(s)
      SIDS      sudden infant death syndrome
      SIGN      Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
      SIRS      systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome
      SL        sublingual
      SLE       systemic lupus erythematosus
      SpO2      arterial oxygen saturation
      SSP       secondary spontaneous pneumothorax
      SSRI      selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor
      STD       sexually transmitted disease
                              ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS   xv
STEMI   ST segment elevation myocardial infarction
SVT     supraventricular tachycardia
T°      temperature
T3      tri-iodothyronine
T4      thyroxine
TAC     tetracaine, adrenaline and cocaine
TB      tuberculosis
tds     three times a day
TFTs    thyroid function tests
TIA     transient ischaemic attack
TIMI    thrombolysis in myocardial infarction
tPA     tissue plasminogen actvator
TSH     thyroid stimulating hormone
u/U     unit(s)
U&E     urea and electrolytes
URTI    upper respiratory tract infection
USS     ultrasound scan
UTI     urinary tract infection
V       volts
VA      visual acuity
VF      ventricular ﬁbrillation
VHF     viral hemorrhagic fever
V/Q     ventilation/perfusion (scan)
VT      ventricular tachycardia
WB      weight-bear(ing)
WBC     white blood cells
WCC     white cell count
WHO     World Health Organization
WPW     Wolff Parkinson White (syndrome)
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                         xvii

         Normal values

Note that ‘normal’ values in adults may vary slightly between labs.
Normal values in pregnancy are shown in b The pregnant patient, p.576.
Arterial blood gas analysis
H+                                           35–45 nanomol/L
pH                                           7.35–7.45
pO2 (on air)                                 >10.6 kPa, 75–100 mmHg
pCO2                                         4.5–6.0 kPa, 35–45 mmHg
bicarbonate                                  24–28 mmol/L
base excess                                  ±2 mmol/L

Biochemistry
alanine aminotransferase (ALT)                5–35 iu/L
albumin                                       35–50 g/L
alkaline phosphatase                          30–300 iu/L
amylase                                       0–180 Somogyi U/dL
aspartate transaminase (AST)                  5–35 iu/L
bicarbonate                                   24–30 mmol/L
bilirubin                                     3–17 micromol/L
calcium (total)                               2.12–2.65 mmol/L
calcium (ionized)                             1–1.25 mmol/L
chloride                                      95–105 mmol/L
creatine kinase (CK)                          25–195 iu/L
creatinine                                    70–150 micromol/L
C-reactive protein (CRP)                      <10 mg/L
glucose (fasting)                             3.5–5.5 mmol/L
G glutamyl transpeptidase (4)                 11–51 IU/L
                          (5)                 7–33 IU/L
magnesium                                     0.75–1.05 mmol/L
osmolality                                    278–305 mosmol/kg
potassium                                     3.5–5.0 mmol/L
sodium                                        135–145 mmol/L
urea                                          2.5–6.7 mmol/L
urate (5)                                     150–390 micromol/L
       (4)                                    210–480 micromol/L
xviii    NORMAL VALUES

        Haematology
        RBC (women)                     3.9–5.6 × 1012/L
              (men)                     4.5–6.5 × 1012/L
        Hb (women)                      11.5–16.0g/dL
            (men)                       13.5–18.0g/dL
        Hct (women)                     0.37–0.47
             (men)                      0.40–0.54
        MCV                             76–96 femtoL
        WCC                             4.0–11.0 × 109/L
        neutrophils                     2.0–7.5 × 109/L (40–75% of WCC)
        lymphocytes                     1.5–4.0 × 109/L (20–40% of WCC)
        monocytes                       0.2–0.8 × 109/L (2–10% of WCC)
        eosinophils                     0.04–0.40 × 109/L (1–6% of WCC)
        basophils                       <0.1 × 109/L (<1% of WCC)
        platelets                       150–400 × 109/L
        prothrombin time
        (factors I, II, VII, X)         12–15sec
        APTT (factors VII,
        IX, XI, XII)                    23–42sec
        International Normalized Ratio (INR) therapeutic targets
        2.0–3.0                    (for treating DVT, pulmonary embolism)
        2.5–3.5                    (embolism prophylaxis for AF)
        3.0–4.5                    (recurrent thrombo-embolic disease,
                                   arterial grafts & prosthetic valves)
        ESR (women)                     < (age in years+10)/2 mm/hr
            (men)                       < (age in years)/2mm/hr
        Metric conversion
        Length
        1m = 3 feet 3.4 inches          1 foot = 0.3048m
        1cm = 0.394 inch                1 inch = 25.4mm
        Weight
        1kg = 2.20 pounds               1 stone = 6.35kg
        1g = 15.4 grains                1 pound = 0.454kg
                                        1 ounce = 28.4g
        Volume
        1 L = 1.76 UK pints = 2.11 US liquid pints
        1 UK pint = 20 ﬂuid ounces = 0.568 L
        1 US liquid pint = 16 ﬂuid ounces = 0.473 L
        1 teaspoon 8 5mL
        1 tablespoon 8 15mL
        Temperature
        T ° in °C = (T ° in Fahrenheit – 32) × –59
        Pressure
        1kPa = 7.5mmHg
                                                                            xix

         Acknowledgements

A number of people provided comments, help and moral support. Special
thanks are due to Dr Phil Munro. We also wish to thank:
Miss Sehlah Abassi, Mr David Alao, Dr Matt Baker, Dr Joan Barber, Dr Ruth
Beach, Mr Dewald Behrens, Dr Ash Bhatia, Dr Angela Bonnar, Dr Rachel
Broadley, Dr Chris Brown, Mrs Debra Clayton, Mr Jon Davies, Dr Kate
Evans, Dr James Falconer, Miss Paula Fitzpatrick, Mrs Jennifer Flemen,
Dr Adrian Flynn, Dr Debbie Galbraith, Mr Blair Graham, Dr Catherine
Guly, Mr Chris Hadﬁeld, Dr Steve Halford, Mr Andrew Harrower, Miss
Emily Hotton, Mr Jim Huntley, Mrs Eileen Hutchison, Mr Nicholas Hyatt,
Dr Karen Illingworth, Mr Ian Kelly, Mr Jacques Kerr, Dr Alastair Kidd,
Dr Paul Leonard, Mr Malcolm Lewis, Mr AF Mabrook, Dr Simon Mardel,
Dr Nick Mathiew, Ms Carolyn Meikle, Dr Louisa Mitchell, Dr Claudia
Murton, Dr Louisa Pieterse, Dr Stephanie Prince, Dr Laura Robertson, Miss
Katharine Robinson, Dr Andrew Sampson, Mr Tom Scott, Dr Simon Scott-
Hayward, Ms Karen Sim, Mr Toby Slade, Dr Timothy Squires, Mr Ashleigh
Stone, Dr Luke Summers, Dr Rob Taylor, Dr Ross Vanstone, Ms Fiona
Wardlaw, Dr Mike Wells, Mr Ken Woodburn, Mrs Polly Wyatt.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 1                                   1

General approach

The emergency department                 2
Note keeping                             4
Radiological requests                    6
Triage                                   7
Discharge, referral, and handover        8
Liaising with GPs                       10
Telephone advice                        11
Liaising with the ambulance crew        12
Coping as a junior doctor               14
Inappropriate attenders                 16
The patient with a label                17
The patient you dislike                 18
Special patient groups                  19
Discharging the elderly patient         20
The patient with learning difﬁculties   21
Patient transfer                        22
Breaking bad news                       24
What to do after a death                26
Medicolegal aspects: avoiding trouble   28
Medicolegal aspects: the law            30
Infection control and prevention        32
What to carry in your car               34
At the roadside                         36
Major incidents                         38
2    CHAPTER 1 General approach

    The emergency department
    The role of the emergency department
    The emergency department (ED) occupies a key position in terms of the
    interface between primary and secondary care. It has a high public proﬁle.
    Many patients attend without referral, but some are referred by NHS
    Direct, minor injury units, general practitioners (GPs), and other medical
    practitioners. The ED manages patients with a huge variety of medical
    problems. Many of the patients who attend have painful and/or distressing
    disorders of recent origin.
    Priorities are:
    • To make life-saving interventions.
    • To provide analgesia.
    • To identify relevant issues, investigations, and commence treatment.
    • To decide upon need for admission or discharge.
    ED staff work as a team. Traditional roles are often blurred, with the
    important issue being what clinical skills a member of staff is capable of.
    ED staff include:
    • Nurses (including nurse practitioners, nurse consultants, health care
      assistants).
    • Doctors (permanent and ﬁxed-term).
    • Reception and administrative staff (receptionists, secretaries,
      managers).
    • Radiographers, including reporting radiographers.
    • Other specialist staff (eg psychiatric liaison nurses, plaster technicians,
      physiotherapists, paramedic practitioners, physician assistants,
      occupational therapists, clinic/ED ward staff).
    • Supporting staff (security, porters, cleaners, police).
    Physical resources
    A principal focus of the ED is to provide immediate resuscitation for
    patients who present with emergency conditions. In terms of sheer
    numbers, more patients attend with minor conditions and injuries, often
    presenting quite a challenge for them to be seen and treated in a timely
    fashion. Different departments have systems to suit their own particular
    needs, but most have a resuscitation room, an area for patients on trolleys,
    and an area for ambulant patients with less serious problems or injuries.
    Paediatric patients are seen in a separate area from adults. In addition,
    every ED requires facilities for applying casts, exploring and suturing
    wounds, obtaining X-rays, and examining patients with eye problems.
    Discharge from the ED
    To work efﬁciently, the overall hospital system needs to enable easy ﬂow
    of patients out of the ED. Options available for continuing care of patients
    who leave the ED, include:
    • Discharge home with no follow-up.
    • Discharge home with GP and/or other community support/follow-up.
    • Discharge with hospital clinic follow-up arranged.
    • Admission to hospital for further investigation and treatment.
    • Transfer to another hospital with more specialist facilities.
                                         THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT                 3

Emergency department staff beyond the emergency
department
In addition to their roles in providing direct clinical care in their
departments, many ED staff provide related clinical care in other settings
and ways:
• Short stay wards (sometimes called clinical decision units) where
  emergency care can be continued by ED staff. The intention is for
  admissions to these units to be short: most of the patients admitted
  to such wards are observed for relatively short periods (<24hr) and
  undergo assessments at an early stage to decide about the need for
  discharge or longer-term admission.
• Outpatient clinics enable patients with a variety of clinical problems (eg
  burns, soft tissue injuries, and infections) to be followed up by ED staff.
• Planned theatre lists run by ED specialists are used by some hospitals to
  manage some simple fractures (eg angulated distal radial fractures).
• Telemedicine advice to satellite and minor injury units.
Emergency medicine in other settings
As the delivery of emergency care continues to develop, patients with
emergency problems are now receiving assessment and treatment in a
variety of settings. These include minor injury units, acute medical assessment
units and walk-in centres. Traditional distinctions between emergency
medicine, acute medicine, and primary care have become blurred.
4    CHAPTER 1 General approach

    Note keeping
    General aspects
    It is impossible to over-emphasize the importance of note keeping.
    Doctors and nurse practitioners each treat hundreds of patients every
    month. With the passage of time, it is impossible to remember all aspects
    relating to these cases, yet it may be necessary to give evidence in court
    about them years after the event. The only reference will be the notes
    made much earlier. Medicolegally, the ED record is the prime source
    of evidence in negligence cases. If the notes are deﬁcient, it may not be
    feasible to defend a claim even if negligence has not occurred. A court
    may consider that the standard of the notes reﬂects the general standard
    of care. Sloppy, illegible, or incomplete notes reﬂect badly on the
    individual. In contrast, if notes are neat, legible, appropriate, and detailed,
    those reviewing the case will naturally expect the general standards of
    care, in terms of history taking, examination, and level of knowledge, to
    be competent.
    The Data Protection and Access to Medical Records Acts give patients right
    of access to their medical notes. Remember, whenever writing notes, that
    the patient may in the future read exactly what has been written. Follow
    the basic general rules listed below.
    Layout
    Follow a standard outline:
    Presenting complaint Indicate from whom the history has been obtained
    (eg the patient, a relative, or ambulance personnel). Avoid attributing
    events to certain individuals (eg patient was struck by ‘Joe Bloggs’).
    Previous relevant history Note recent ED attendances. Include family and
    social history. An elderly woman with a Colles’ fracture of her dominant
    hand may be able to manage at home with routine follow-up provided
    she is normally in good health, and has good family or other support, but
    if she lives alone in precarious social conditions without such support,
    then admission on ‘social grounds’ may be required.
    Current medications Remember to ask about non-prescribed drugs
    (including recreational, herbal, and homeopathic). Women may not
    volunteer the oral contraceptive pill (OCP) as ‘medication’ unless
    speciﬁcally asked. Enquire about allergies to medications and document
    the nature of this reaction.
    Examination ﬁndings As well as +ve features, document relevant –ve
    ﬁndings (eg the absence of neck stiffness in a patient with headache and
    pyrexia). Always document the side of the patient which has been injured.
    For upper limb injuries, note whether the patient is left or right handed.
    Use ‘left’ and ‘right’, not ‘L’ and ‘R’. Document if a patient is abusive or
    aggressive, but avoid non-medical, judgemental terms (eg ‘drunk’).
    Investigation ﬁndings Record clearly.
    Working diagnosis For patients being admitted, this may be a differential
    diagnostic list. Sometimes a problem list can help.
                                                         NOTE KEEPING          5

Treatment given Document drugs, including dose, time, and route of
administration (see current British National Formulary (BNF) for guidance).
Include medications given in the ED, as well as therapy to be continued
(eg course of antibiotics). Note the number and type of sutures or staples
used for wound closure (eg ‘5 × 6/0 nylon sutures’).
Advice and follow-up arrangements Document if the patient and/or
relative is given preprinted instructions (eg ‘POP care’). Indicate when/
if the patient needs to be reviewed (eg ‘see GP in 5 days for suture
removal’) or other arrangement (eg ‘Fracture clinic in one week’).
Record advice about when/why the patient should return for review,
especially if there is a risk of a rare but serious complication (eg for low
back pain ‘see GP if not better in 1 week. Return to the ED at once if
bladder/bowel problem or numb groin/bottom’ that might be features of
cauda equina syndrome).
Basic rules
• Write legibly in ballpoint pen, ideally black, which photocopies well.
• Always date and time the notes.
• Sign the notes, and print your name and status below.
• Make your notes concise and to the point.
• Use simple line drawings or preprinted sheets for wound/injury
  descriptions.
• Avoid idiosyncratic abbreviations.
• Never make rude or judgemental comments.
• Always document the name, grade, and specialty of any doctor from
  whom you have received advice.
• When referring or handing a patient over, always document the time of
  referral/handover, together with the name, grade, and specialty of the
  receiving doctor.
• Inform the GP by letter (b Liaising with GPs, p.10), even if the patient
  is admitted. Most EDs have computerized systems that generate such
  letters. In complex cases, send also a copy of ED notes, with results of
  investigations.
Pro formas
Increasing emphasis on evidence-based guidelines and protocols has
been associated with the introduction of protocols for many patient
presentations and conditions. Bear in mind the fact that, for some patients,
satisfactory completion of a pro forma may not adequately capture all of
the information required.
Electronic records
In an electronic age, there has been an understandable move towards
trying to introduce electronic patient records. The potential advantages
are obvious, particularly in relation to rapidly ascertaining past medical
history. When completing electronic records, practitioners need to follow
the same principles as those outlined above for written records.
Access to old records can make a huge contribution to decision making.
One potential advantage of electronic records is that they can be accessed
rapidly (compared with older systems requiring a porter to search through
the medical records store and retrieve paper-based notes).
6    CHAPTER 1 General approach

    Radiological requests
    ‘I am glad to say that in this country there is no need to carry out
    unnecessary tests as a form of insurance. It is not in this country desirable,
    or indeed necessary, that over protective and over examination work
    should be done, merely and purely and simply as I say to protect oneself
    against possible litigation’—Judge Fallon, quoted by Oscar Craig, Chairman
    Cases Committee, Medical Protection Society.
    Requesting investigations
    The Royal College of Radiologists’ booklet ‘Making the Best Use of a
    Department of Clinical Radiology: Guidelines for Doctors’ (6th edn, London,
    RCR, 2007) contains very useful information and is strongly recommended.
    General aspects
    • An X-ray is no substitute for careful, thorough clinical examination. It is
      usually unnecessary to request X-rays to conﬁrm the clinical diagnosis
      of uncomplicated fractures of the nose, coccyx, a single rib, or toes
      (other than the big toe).
    • If in doubt about the need for X-rays or the speciﬁc test required,
      consider relevant guidelines (eg Ottawa rules for ankle injuries,
      b p.484) and/or discuss with senior ED staff or radiologist.
    • When requesting X-rays, describe the indication/mechanism of injury,
      clinical ﬁndings, including the side involved (right or left—spelt out
      in full, not abbreviated) and the suspected clinical diagnosis. This is
      important for the radiologist reporting the ﬁlms without the advantage
      of being able to examine the patient.
    • Do not worry about specifying exactly which X-ray views are required.
      The radiographer will know the standard views that are needed, based
      on the information provided (eg AP + simpliﬁed apical oblique views for
      a patient with suspected anterior shoulder dislocation). In unusual cases,
      discuss with senior ED staff, radiographer, or radiologist.
    • Always consider the possibility of pregnancy in women of child-bearing
      age before requesting an X-ray of the abdomen, pelvis, lumbar spine,
      hips, or thighs. If the clinical indication for X-ray is overriding, tell the
      radiographer, who will attempt to shield the foetus/gonads. If the risks/
      beneﬁts of X-rays in pregnant or possibly pregnant women are not
      obvious, consult senior ED or radiology staff.
    X-ray reporting system
    Many hospitals have systems so that all ED X-rays are reported by a
    specialist within 24hr. Reports of any missed abnormalities are returned
    with the X-rays to the ED for the attention of senior staff, so that
    appropriate action can be taken.
    System for identifying abnormalities
    In addition to the formal reporting system described above, a system is
    commonly used whereby the radiographer taking the ﬁlms applies a sticky
    ‘red dot’ to hard copy X-ray ﬁlms and/or request card or to the equivalent
    electronic image if they identify an abnormality. This alerts other clinical
    staff to the possibility of abnormal ﬁndings.
                                                                     TRIAGE       7

Triage
The nature of ED work means that a sorting system is required to ensure
that patients with the most immediately life-threatening conditions are seen
ﬁrst. A triage process aims to categorize patients based on their medical
need and the available departmental resources. One most commonly used
process in the UK is the National Triage Scale (Table 1.1).

 Table 1.1
 National Triage Scale          Colour          Time to be seen by doctor
 1 Immediate                    Red             Immediately
 2 Very urgent                  Orange          Within 5–10 min
 3 Urgent                       Yellow          Within 1 hr
 4 Standard                     Green           Within 2 hr
 5 Non-urgent                   Blue            Within 4 hr

As soon as a patient arrives in the ED he/she should be assessed by a
dedicated triage nurse (a senior, experienced individual with considerable
common sense). This nurse should provide any immediate interventions
needed (eg elevating injured limbs, applying ice packs or splints, and giving
analgesia) and initiate investigations to speed the patient’s journey through
the department (eg ordering appropriate X-rays). Patients should not
have to wait to be triaged. It is a brief assessment which should take no
more than a few minutes.
Three points require emphasis:
• Triage is a dynamic process. The urgency (and hence triage category)
  with which a patient requires to be seen may change with time. For
  example a middle-aged man who hobbles in with an inversion ankle
  injury is likely to be placed in triage category 4 (green). If in the waiting
  room he becomes pale, sweaty, and complains of chest discomfort, he
  would require prompt re-triage into category 2 (orange).
• Placement in a triage category does not imply a diagnosis, or even the
  lethality of a condition (eg an elderly patient with colicky abdominal
  discomfort, vomiting, and absolute constipation would normally
  be placed in category 3 (yellow) and a possible diagnosis would be
  bowel obstruction). The cause may be a neoplasm which has already
  metastasized and is hence likely to be ultimately fatal.
• Triage has its own problems. In particular, patients in non-urgent
  categories may wait inordinately long periods of time, whilst patients
  who have presented later, but with conditions perceived to be more
  urgent, are seen before them. Patients need to be aware of this and to
  be informed of likely waiting times. Uncomplaining elderly patients can
  often be poorly served by the process.
8    CHAPTER 1 General approach

    Discharge, referral, and handover
    Most patients seen in the ED are examined, investigated, treated, and
    discharged home, either with no follow-up, or advice to see their GP (for
    suture removal, wound checks, etc.). Give these patients (and/or attending
    relative/friend) clear instructions on when to attend the GP’s surgery and
    an indication of the likely course of events, as well as any features that
    they should look out for to prompt them to seek medical help prior to
    this. Formal written instructions are particularly useful for patients with
    minor head injury (b p.367) and those with limbs in POP or other forms
    of cast immobilization (b Casts and their problems, p.424).
    The referral of patients to an inpatient team can cause considerable
    anxiety, misunderstanding, and potential conﬂict between ED staff and
    other disciplines. Before making the referral the following should be
    considered.
    Is it appropriate to refer this patient to the inpatient team?
    Usually, this will be obvious. For example, a middle-aged man with a
    history of crushing chest pain and an ECG showing an acute MI clearly
    requires urgent management in the ED, and rapid admission for further
    investigation and treatment. Similarly, an elderly lady who has fallen, is
    unable to weight-bear and has a fractured neck of femur will require
    analgesia, inpatient care and surgery.
    However, difﬁcult situations occur where the clinical situation is less clear;
    for example, if a man experienced 4–5min of atypical chest pain, has a
    normal ECG and chest X-ray (CXR), and is anxious to go home. Or a lady
    has no apparent fracture on X-ray, but cannot weight-bear.
    Is there appropriate information to make this decision?
    This requires a balance between availability, time, and appropriateness.
    In general, simple investigations which rapidly give the diagnosis, or clues
    to it, are all that are needed. These include electrocardiogram (ECGs),
    arterial blood gas (ABG), and plain X-rays. It is relatively unusual to have
    to wait for the results of investigations such as full blood count (FBC), urea
    & electrolytes (U&E), and liver function tests (LFTs) before referring a
    patient, since these rarely alter the immediate management. Simple trolley-
    side investigations are often of great value, for example, stix estimations
    of blood glucose (BMG) and urinalysis. If complicated investigations are
    needed, then referral for inpatient or outpatient specialist care is often
    required.
    Has the patient had appropriate treatment pending the admission?
    Do not forget, or delay, analgesia. Treat every patient in pain appropriately
    as soon as possible. A patient does not have to ‘earn’ analgesia. Never
    delay analgesia to allow further examination or investigation. Concern
    regarding masking of signs or symptoms (for example, in a patient with an
    acute abdomen) is inhumane and incorrect.
                             DISCHARGE, REFERRAL, AND HANDOVER                 9

How to refer patients
Referral is often by telephone, and this can create problems:
• Introduce yourself and ask for the name and grade of the specialist.
• Give a clear, concise summary of the history, investigations, and
  treatment that you have already undertaken.
• Early in the discussion say clearly whether you are making a referral for
  admission or a request for a specialist opinion. With ever increasing
  pressure on hospital beds, inpatient teams can be reluctant to come
  and see patients, and may appear to be happier to give advice over
  the phone to avoid admission. If, in your view, the patient needs to
  be admitted, then clearly indicate this. If, for whatever reason, this is
  declined, do not get cross, rude, or aggressive, but contact senior ED
  medical staff to speak to the specialist team.
• When the specialist team comes to see the patient, or the patient is
  admitted directly to a ward, the ED notes need to be complete and
  legible. Make sure that there is a list of the investigations already
  performed, together with the available results and crucially, a list of
  investigations whose results remain outstanding. The latter is essential
  to ensure continuity of care and to prevent an important result ‘falling
  through the net’. Similarly, summarize treatment already given and the
  response. In an emergency, do not delay referral or treatment merely
  to complete the notes, but complete them at the earliest opportunity.
• Encourage inpatient specialists who attend patients to write their
  ﬁndings and management plan in the notes, adding a signature and the
  time/date.
Handing over patients
Dangers of handing over
Handing over a patient to a colleague, because your shift has ended and
you are going home, is fraught with danger. It is easy for patients to be
neglected, or receive sub-optimal or delayed treatment. It is safest
to complete to the point of discharge or referral to an inpatient team
every patient that you are seeing at the end of a shift. Occasionally this
may not be possible (eg if there is a delay in obtaining an X-ray or other
investigation). In these situations, hand over the patient carefully to the
doctor who is taking over and inform the nursing staff of this.
How to hand over
Include in the handover relevant aspects of history and examination
performed, the investigation results, and the treatment undertaken. Sign
and aim to complete records on the patient as soon as possible. Note the
time of hand over, and the name of the doctor or nurse handed over to.
When accepting a ‘handed-over patient’ at the start of a shift, spend time
establishing exactly what has happened so far. Finally, it is courteous (and
will prevent problems) to tell the patient that their further care will be
performed by another doctor or nurse.
10    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Liaising with GPs
     Despite changes in the way that care (particularly out of hours) is delivered,
     GPs still have a pivotal role in co-ordinating medical care. Often the GP will
     know more than anyone about the past history, social and family situation,
     and recent events of their patient’s management. Therefore, contact the
     GP when these aspects are relevant to the patient’s ED attendance, or
     where considerations of admission or discharge are concerned.
     Every attendance is followed routinely by a letter to the GP detailing the
     reason(s) for presentation, clinical ﬁndings and relevant investigations,
     treatment given, and follow-up arrangements.
     If a patient dies, contact the GP without delay—to provide a medical
     contact and assistance to the bereaved family, to prevent embarrassing
     experiences (eg letters requesting clinic attendances), and out of courtesy,
     because the GP is the patient’s primary medical attendant. Finally, the GP
     may be asked to issue a death certiﬁcate by the Coroner (in Scotland, the
     Procurator Fiscal) following further enquiries.
     Always contact the GP prior to the discharge of a patient where early
     follow-up (ie within the next 24–72hr) is required. This may occur with
     elderly patients where there is uncertainty about the home situation and
     their ability to manage. A typical example is an elderly lady with a Colles’
     fracture of her dominant wrist who lives alone. The ED management of
     this patient is relatively simple (b p.444). However, merely manipulating
     a Colles’ fracture into a good position, supporting it in an adequate
     cast, and providing analgesia, is only one facet of care. The GP may know
     that the lady has supportive relatives or neighbours who will help with
     shopping and cooking, and will help her to bath and dress. The GP and
     the primary care team may be able to supplement existing support and
     check that the patient is coping. Equally, the GP may indicate that with
     additional home support (eg home helps, meals, district nurses), the
     patient could manage. Alternatively, the GP may indicate that the Colles’
     fracture merely represents the ﬁnal event in an increasingly fragile home
     situation and that the patient will require hospital admission, at least in the
     short-term.
     For the same reasons, a GP who refers a patient to the ED and indicates
     that the patient requires admission does so in the full knowledge of that
     patient’s circumstances. Always contact the GP if it is contemplated
     that the patient is to be discharged—preferably after senior medical
     consultation.
     Finally, remember that GPs are also under considerable pressure.
     Some situations may appear to reﬂect the fact that a patient has been
     referred inappropriately or the patient may report that they have tried
     to contact their GP unsuccessfully. Rather than irately ringing the practice
     and antagonizing them, inform the ED consultant who can raise this
     constructively and appropriately in a suitable environment.
                                                       TELEPHONE ADVICE        11

Telephone advice
Many departments receive calls from patients, parents, and other carers
for advice. Approach these calls in exactly the same way as a face-to-face
consultation. Formally document details of the call, including:
• Date and time of the call.
• The caller’s telephone number.
• The caller’s relationship to the patient.
• The patient’s name, age, and sex.
• The nature of the problem.
• The advice given.
As with all notes, date, time, and sign these notes.
NHS Direct
In England and Wales NHS Direct provides a 24-hr, 7-day a week telephone
service providing information and advice on health matters. It is staffed by
nurses who respond according to protocols.
The telephone number for NHS Direct is 0845 4647.
The equivalent service in Scotland is NHS24 tel. 08454 242424.
These services have internet websites at www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk and
www.nhs24.com
Telephone advice calls from other health professionals
Occasionally, other health professionals request advice regarding the
management of patients in their care. Such advice should be given by
experienced ED staff.
Telemedicine
Increasingly, emergency health care is provided by integrated networks,
which include EDs, minor injuries units, radiology departments, and GP
surgeries connected by telemedicine links. This has advantages in remote
or rural settings, enabling a wide range of injuries and other emergencies
to be diagnosed and treated locally. The combination of video and
teleradiology may allow a decision to be made and explained directly
to the patient. A typical example is whether a patient with an isolated
Colles’ fracture needs to have a manipulation of the fracture. Expertise
is required to undertake telemedicine consultations safely. This specialist
advice should be given by senior ED staff, and careful documentation is
crucial.
12    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Liaising with the ambulance crew
     Paramedics and ED staff have a close professional relationship. Paramedics
     and ambulance staff are professionals who work in conditions that are
     often difﬁcult and sometimes dangerous. It is worth taking an off-duty day
     to accompany a crew during their shift to see the problems they face.
     A beneﬁt of paramedic training has been to bring ambulance staff into the
     ED to work with medical and nursing staff, and to foster the communication
     and rapport essential for good patient management.
     In the UK, a patient brought to an ED by ambulance will routinely have a
     patient report form (PRF) (see Fig. 1.1). This is completed by the crew at
     the scene and in transit, and given to reception or nursing staff on arrival.
     The information on these forms can be invaluable. In particular, the time
     intervals between the receipt of the 999 call, and arrival at the scene and
     at hospital, provide a time framework within which changes in the patient’s
     clinical condition can be placed and interpreted.
     The initial at-scene assessment will include details of the use of seat belts,
     airbags, crash helmets, etc., and is particularly valuable when ampliﬁed by
     speciﬁcally asking the crew about their interpretation of the event, likely
     speeds involved, types of vehicle, etc.
     The clinical features of the Glasgow Coma Score (GCS), pulse rate, blood
     pressure (BP), and respiratory rate form baseline values from which trends
     and response to treatment can be judged. Useful aspects in the history/
     comments section include previous complaints, current medications, etc.,
     which the crew may have obtained from the patient, relatives, or friends.
     The PRF will also contain important information about oxygen, drugs, IV
     ﬂuids administered, and the response to these interventions. Before the
     crew leave the department, conﬁrm that they have provided all relevant
     information.
     Do not be judgemental about the crew’s performance. Remember the
     constraints under which they operate. Without the beneﬁts of a warm
     environment, good lighting, and sophisticated equipment, it can be
     exceedingly difﬁcult to make accurate assessments of illness or injury
     severity, or to perform otherwise simple tasks (eg airway management
     and intravenous (IV) cannulation).
     Do not dismiss the overall assessment of a patient made by an experienced
     crew. While the ultimate diagnosis may not be clear (a situation which
     pertains equally in the ED), their evaluation of the potential for life-
     threatening events is often extremely perceptive. Equally, take heed of
     their description of crash scenes. They will have seen far more than most
     ED staff, so accept their greater experience.
     Most ambulance staff are keen to obtain feedback, both about speciﬁc cases
     and general aspects of medical care. Like everyone, they are interested
     in their patients. A few words as to what happened to Mrs Smith who
     was brought in last week and her subsequent clinical course is a friendly
     and easy way of providing informal feedback, and helps to cement the
     professional relationship between the ambulance service and the ED.
                                LIAISING WITH THE AMBULANCE CREW                   13

Fig. 1.1 An example of a patient reporting form. Reproduced with kind permission
from the Scottish Ambulance Service.
14    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Coping as a junior doctor
     Although many junior doctors coming to the ED have completed more
     than 12 months of work since qualiﬁcation, the prospect of working at the
     ‘sharp end’ can be accompanied by trepidation. As with many potentially
     worrying situations in life, reality is not as terrifying as its anticipation. The
     number of hours worked may not appear long in comparison with other
     posts, but do not assume that this makes an ED job ‘easy’. Being on duty
     inevitably involves much time standing, walking, working, thinking, and making
     decisions. It is unusual to come off-shift without feeling physically tired.
     Active young doctors can usually cope with these physical demands, but a
     demanding professional life and demanding social life are rarely compatible.
     Make the most of time off and try to relax from the pressures of the job.
     One function of relaxation is to enable you to face work refreshed and
     invigorated. You are mistaken if you believe that you can stay out all night
     and then work unimpaired the next day. Tired doctors make mistakes.
     They also tend to have less patience and, as a consequence, interpersonal
     conﬂicts are more likely.
     A greater problem is the mental aspect of the job. Doctors often ﬁnd that
     the ED is the ﬁrst time in their careers when they have to make unequiv-
     ocal decisions based on their own assessment and investigations. This is
     one of the great challenges and excitements of emergency medicine. It is
     also a worry. Decision-making is central to ED practice and, with experi-
     ence, the process becomes easier. Developing a structured approach can
     pre-empt many problems and simplify your life. After taking an appropriate
     history and completing the relevant clinical examination of a patient, ask
     yourself a series of questions such as:
     • Do I know what is likely to be wrong with this patient?
     • What investigations are required to conﬁrm the diagnosis?
     • Do I know what treatment is needed and have I got the skills needed?
     • Does this patient require referral to an inpatient team (b p.8)?
     • If not, do they need to be reviewed in the ED or another specialist clinic?
     The wide spectrum of problems with which ED patients can present
     means that no individual can be expert in every possible condition. It
     is therefore as important to recognize and accept when you are out of
     your depth as it is to make decisions and treat patients whom you know
     you can manage. Seek help appropriately and do not just try to muddle
     through. Help may be readily available from senior ED staff, but in some
     departments direct contact with a specialist team is required. One of
     the most difﬁcult situations is where a specialist either refuses to come
     to see the patient or gives telephone advice that is clearly inappropriate.
     You must always act as the patient’s advocate. If you refer a patient with
     a fractured neck of femur, and the telephone message from the inpatient
     team is ‘bring him back to the Fracture Clinic in one week’, it is clearly
     wrong to carry this out. First, check that the doctor has understood the
     details of the patient’s condition and your concerns. More conﬂict and
     aggravation is caused by communication errors (usually involving second-
     hand telephone messages) than by anything else. If the situation remains
     unresolved, consult senior ED staff. Whatever happens, never lose your
     cool in public and always put your patient’s interests ﬁrst.
                                       COPING AS A JUNIOR DOCTOR               15

Learning in the ED
Try to learn something new every day. Keep a note of patients with
interesting or unusual problems, and later check what happened to them.
Ask senior staff for advice. Use the ED reference books. Try to note all
new conditions seen during a shift and read about them later.
Staff interaction
The nature of the job, the patients, and the diversity of staff involved
means that a considerable degree of camaraderie exists. For an outsider,
this can initially be daunting. Junior medical staff are likely to work for
4−12 months in the department. Other staff may have spent a lifetime
there with long-established friendships (or sometimes animosities).
Respect their position and experience, learn from them.
The nub of this is an understanding that the role of one individual and that
of other individuals in the department are inextricably linked. Any junior
(or senior) doctor who feels that they are the most important individual
in their working environment will have an extremely uncomfortable
professional existence. In the ED, every member of staff has a role. Your
professionalism should dictate that you respect this. Only in this way will
you gain reciprocal respect from other staff members.
Never consider any job ‘beneath you’ or someone else’s responsibility.
Patients come before pride. So, if portering staff are rushed off their
feet and you are unoccupied, wheel a patient to X-ray yourself—it will
improve your standing with your colleagues and help the patient.
Shifts
Rule 1 Never be late for your shift.
Rule 2 If, for whatever reason, you are unable to work a shift, let the
senior staff in the ED know as soon as possible.
Ensure that you take a break. Two or three short breaks in an 8-hr shift
are better than one long one. Remember to eat and maintain your ﬂuid
intake. Shift working may mean that you will work sometimes with familiar
faces and perhaps occasionally with individuals with whom you ﬁnd social
contact uncomfortable. Put these considerations aside while you are at
work, for the sake of the patients and your peace of mind.
If you can’t cope
Finally, if you feel that you are unable to manage or that the pressure
of the job is too great—tell someone. Don’t bottle it up, try to ignore it,
or assume that it reﬂects inadequacy. It doesn’t. Everyone, at some time,
has feelings of inability to cope. Trying to disguise or deny the situation
is unfair to yourself, your colleagues, and your patients. You need to tell
someone and discuss things. Do it now. Talk to your consultant. If you
cannot face him or her, talk to your GP or another senior member of
staff—but talk to someone who can help you.
The BMA Counselling Service for Doctors (tel: 08459 200169) provides a
conﬁdential counselling service 24 hr a day, 365 days of the year to discuss
personal, emotional, and work-related problems. The Doctors’ Support
Network (www.dsn.org.uk) and Doctors’ Support Line (tel: 0844 395
3010) are also useful resources.
16    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Inappropriate attenders
     This is an emotive and ill-deﬁned term. Depending upon the department,
     such patients could comprise 4–20% of attendances.
     The perception as to whether it is appropriate to go to an ED or attend a
     GP will vary between the patient, GP, and ED staff. Appropriateness is not
     simply related to the symptoms, diagnosis, or the time interval involved. It
     may not necessarily be related to the need for investigation. For example,
     not all patients who require an X-ray necessarily have to attend an ED.
     Further blurring of ‘appropriate’ and ‘inappropriate’ groups relates to the
     geographical location of the ED. In rural areas, GPs frequently perform
     procedures such as suturing. In urban areas, these arrangements are less
     common. For ill-deﬁned reasons, patients often perceive that they should
     only contact their GP during ‘ofﬁce’ hours, and outside these times may
     attend an ED with primary care complaints.
     It is clearly inappropriate to come to an ED simply because of a real or
     perceived difﬁculty in accessing primary care. Nevertheless, the term
     ‘inappropriate attendance’ is a pejorative one—it is better to use the
     phrase ‘primary care patients’. It must be recognized that primary care
     problems are best dealt with by GPs. Many departments try to prevent
     this primary care workload presenting to the ED. Some departments
     tackle the problem by having GPs working alongside ED staff.
     Managing inappropriate attenders
     Only through a continual process of patient education will these problems
     be resolved. Initiatives include nurse practitioner minor injury units and
     hospital-based primary care services. Evaluations are underway but, to
     function effectively, such services require adequate funding and stafﬁng.
     It can sometimes be difﬁcult to deal with primary care problems in the
     ED. After an appropriate history and examination, it may be necessary to
     explain to patients that they will have to attend their own GP. This may
     need direct contact between the ED and the practice to facilitate this.
     Inappropriate referrals
     Sometimes, it may appear that another health professional (eg GP,
     emergency nurse practitioner, nurse at NHS Direct) has referred a patient
     to the ED inappropriately. Avoid making such judgements. Treat patients
     on their merits, but mention the issue to your consultant. Remember
     that the information available to the referring clinician at the time of the
     prehospital consultation is likely to have been different to that available at
     the time of ED attendance.
                                           THE PATIENT WITH A LABEL             17

The patient with a label
Some patients will have been referred by another medical practitioner,
usually a GP. The accompanying letter may include a presumptive diagnosis.
The details in the letter are often extremely helpful, but do not assume
the diagnosis is necessarily correct. Take particular care with patients who
re-attend following an earlier attendance. The situation may have changed
since the previous doctor saw the patient. Clinical signs may have developed
or regressed. The patient may have not given the referring doctor and
ED staff the same history. Do not pre-judge the problem: start with an
open mind. Apply common sense, however. Keep any previous history in
mind. For example, assume that a patient with a known abdominal aortic
aneurysm who collapses with sudden, severe, abdominal pain, signs of
hypovolaemic shock, and a tender pulsatile mass in the abdomen, to have a
ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, rather than intestinal obstruction. The
patient’s previous ED and hospital case notes are invaluable and will often
give useful information and allow, for example, ECG comparisons, aiding
the diagnostic process. A call to the GP can also provide useful background,
which they may not have had time to include in their referral letter or may
have excluded for conﬁdentiality or other reasons.
Self-labelled patients
Take care with patients who label themselves. Those with chronic or
unusual diseases often know signiﬁcantly more about their conditions than
ED staff! In such situations, take special notice of comments and advice
from the patient and/or their relatives. Do not resent this or see it as a
professional affront—rapport with the patient will increase markedly and
management will usually be easier.
Regular attenders
Every ED has a group of ‘regular’ patients who, with time, become physically
and sometimes emotionally attached to the department. Some have
underlying psychiatric illnesses, often with ‘inadequate’ personalities. Some
are homeless. Regular attenders frequently use the ED as a source
of primary care. As outlined above, make attempts to direct them to
appropriate facilities, because the ED is unsuited to the management of
chronic illness, and is unable to provide the continuing medical and nursing
support that these patients require.
Repeated presentations with apparently trivial complaints or with the
same complaint often tax the patience of ED staff. This is heightened if the
presentations are provoked or aggravated by alcohol intake. Remember,
however, that these patients can and do suffer from the same acute events
as everyone else. Keep an open mind, diagnostically and in attitude to the
patient. Just because he/she has returned for the third time in as many
days complaining of chest pain, does not mean that on this occasion he
does not have an acute MI! Maintain adequate documentation for each
attendance. Occasionally, especially with intractable re-attenders, a joint
meeting between the social work team, GP, ED consultant and psychiatric
services is required to provide a deﬁnitive framework for both the patient
and the medical services. For some patients, it will be possible to follow a
plan of action for ED presentations with a particular complaint.
18    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     The patient you dislike
     General approach
     Accept the patient as he or she is, regardless of behaviour, class, religion,
     social lifestyle, or colour. Given human nature, there will inevitably be
     some patients whom you immediately dislike or ﬁnd difﬁcult. The feeling
     is often mutual. Many factors that cause patients to present to the ED may
     aggravate the situation. These include their current medical condition, their
     past experiences in hospitals, their social situation, and any concurrent use
     of alcohol and/or other drugs. Your approach and state of mind during
     the consultation play a major role. This will be inﬂuenced by whether the
     department is busy, how much sleep you have had recently, and when you
     last had a break for coffee or food.
     Given the nature of ED workload and turnover, conﬂict slows down
     the process and makes it more likely that you will make clinical errors.
     Many potential conﬂicts can be avoided by an open, pleasant approach.
     Introduce yourself politely to the patient. Use body language to reduce a
     potentially aggressive response.
     The patient’s perspective
     Put yourself in the patient’s position. Any patient marched up to by a
     doctor who has their hands on hips, a glaring expression, and the demand
     ‘Well, what’s wrong with you now?’ will retort aggressively.
     Defusing a volatile situation
     Most complaints and aggression occur when the department is busy and
     waiting times are long. Patients understand the pressures medical and
     nursing staff have to work under, and a simple, ‘I am sorry you have had to
     wait so long, but we have had a number of emergencies elsewhere in the
     department’, does much to diffuse potential conﬂict and will often mean
     that the patient starts to sympathize with you as a young, overworked
     practitioner!
     There is never any excuse for rude, abusive, or aggressive behaviour
     to a patient. If you are rude, complaints will invariably follow and more
     importantly, the patient will not have received the appropriate treatment
     for their condition. It may be necessary to hand care of a patient to a
     colleague if an unresolvable conﬂict has arisen.
     Management of the violent patient is considered in detail on b p.610.
                                              SPECIAL PATIENT GROUPS            19

Special patient groups
Attending the ED is difﬁcult enough, but can be even more so for certain
‘special’ patient groups. It is important that ED staff are sensitive to the
needs of these groups and that there are systems in place to help them
in what may be regarded as an intimidating atmosphere. The following list
is far from exhaustive, but includes some important groups who require
particular consideration:
• Children: they are such an ‘obvious’ and large ‘minority’ group that they
   receive special attention to suit their particular needs (see b Paediatric
   emergencies, p.630).
• Pregnant women: see b Obstetrics and gynaecology, p.563.
• Those with mental health problems: see b Psychiatry, p.601.
• The elderly: who often have multiple medical problems and live in
   socially precarious circumstances.
• Patients with Alzheimer’s disease and other states associated with
   chronic confusion.
• Those with learning difﬁculties: b p.21.
• Patients with hearing problems.
• The visually impaired.
• Those who do not speak or understand English: arrangements should be in
   place to enable the use of interpreters.
• Patients with certain cultural or religious beliefs (particularly amongst
   ‘minority groups’): these can impact signiﬁcantly upon a variety of
   situations (eg after unsuccessful resuscitation for cardiac arrest—
   b Breaking bad news, p.24).
• Those who are homeless or are away from home, friends, and family
   (eg holiday makers).
• Those who have drug/alcohol dependency.
Isn’t everyone special?
Taken at face value, the concept that certain groups of patients are
‘special’ and so require special attention does not meet with universal
approval. There is a good argument that every patient deserves the best
possible care. Whilst this is true, it is also obvious that certain patients
do have additional needs that need to be considered. Many of these
additional needs relate to effective communication. There are some
tremendous resources available that can help practitioners to overcome
communication difﬁculties (eg www.communicationpeople.co.uk).
20    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Discharging the elderly patient
     There are no set predisposing factors that determine patients most at risk
     following discharge. Those that affect the chance of difﬁculties at home
     include the current medical problem, underlying functional and social factors.
     Risk indicators
     Multiple pathologies and atypical symptoms render this group more vulnerable
     to the physical, functional, and social effects of acute illness. Past medical
     history and pre-admission status are especially important determinants
     for patients with dementia or psychiatric illness. There may be evidence of
     recently changed circumstances, a recent bereavement, a change in medical or
     physical condition, increasing confusion, or unusual behaviour. The patient may
     not be able to afford adequate food or heating. Community services may not
     be aware that support is needed or help may have been offered, but refused.
     Other important indicators are:
     • Those living alone.
     • Absence of close family support or community services.
     • Unsuitable home circumstances (eg external or internal stairs).
     • Difﬁculty with mobility.
     Determining those unable to cope
     Look for evidence of self-neglect that suggests that the elderly person
     is having difﬁculty coping at home (eg poor personal hygiene, unclean or
     unsuitable clothing). Evidence of recent weight loss may suggest difﬁculties
     with food preparation or eating, unavailability of food, or may be due to
     serious pathology, such as a malignancy or tuberculosis. Signs of old bruising
     or other minor injuries may be consistent with frequent falls. Shortness of
     breath and any condition producing impaired mobility are important factors.
     Falls are a common problem of old age and require careful analysis, perhaps
     at a special ‘Falls’ clinic. Correctable factors include damaged walking aids,
     loose rugs, poor lighting, or unsuitable footwear or glasses. Common medical
     causes include cerebrovascular disease, arthritis, and side-effects of drugs.
     Many elderly people claim that they can cope at home when they are unable
     to do so. If in doubt, ask relatives, the GP, and community support agencies.
     They may give helpful insight into the patient’s mental state, which can be
     investigated/assessed further, whether it be a cognitive or reactive condition.
     The decision to discharge
     Hospital admission for an elderly person is a frightening experience and
     can lead to confusion and disorientation. If circumstances allow, discharge
     home is often a more appropriate outcome. If there are concerns regarding
     their functional ability and mobility, ask for an occupational therapy and/
     or physiotherapy assessment with, if appropriate, a home assessment.
     The elderly person is best seen in their home environment with familiar
     surroundings, especially if there is evidence of cognitive deﬁcit. The provision
     of equipment and recommendations for adaptations can be made at this
     point if required. A wide range of community services including district
     nurse, health visitor, home help, crisis care, social work, hospital discharge,
     and rapid response therapy teams can be contacted to provide immediate
     follow-up and support and play a crucial role in preventing later breakdowns
     in home circumstances and unnecessary admissions for social reasons.
                          THE PATIENT WITH LEARNING DIFFICULTIES                  21

The patient with learning difﬁculties
Patients with learning difﬁculties use the healthcare system more than the
general population. Unfortunately, many healthcare professionals have
little experience with these patients. However, understanding common
illness patterns and using different techniques in communication can result
in a successful consultation. Patients with learning difﬁculties often have
complex health needs. There are many barriers to assessing health care,
which may lead to later presentations of illness. Patients may have a high
tolerance of pain—take this into consideration when examining them.
Associated health problems
Patients with learning difﬁculties have a higher incidence of certain problems:
• Visual and hearing impairment.
• Poor dental health.
• Swallowing problems.
• Gastro-oesophageal reﬂux disease.
• Constipation.
• Urinary tract and other infections.
• Epilepsy.
• Mental health problems (i incidence of depression, anxiety disorders,
  schizophrenia, delirium, and dementia), with speciﬁc syndromes
  having their own particular associations (eg Down’s is associated with
  depression and dementia; Prader–Willi with affective psychosis).
• Behavioural problems (eg Prader–Willi, Angelman syndrome).
Leading causes of death
These include pneumonia (relating to reﬂux, aspiration, swallowing, and
feeding problems) and congenital heart disease.
The patient’s perspective
Past experiences of hospital are likely to have a big impact on the patient’s
reaction to his/her current situation. Most patients have problems with
expression, comprehension, and social communication. They ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to describe symptoms—behavioural change may the best indication that
something is wrong.
Tips for communication
• Explain the consultation process before starting.
• Speak ﬁrst to the patient, then to the carer.
• Use open questions, then re-phrase to check again.
• Aim to use language that the patient understands, modifying this
  according to comprehension.
• Patients may have difﬁculties with time, so try to relate symptoms to
  real life temporal events (eg ‘did the pain start before lunch?’)
• They may not make a connection between something that they have
  done and feeling ill (eg several questions may be required in order to
  establish that they have ingested something).
• Take particular note of what the carer has to say—information from
  someone who knows the patient well is invaluable.
22    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Patient transfer
     The need to transfer
     When patients have problems that exceed the capabilities of a hospital
     and/or its personnel, transfer to another hospital may be needed.
     Timing the transfer
     Do not commence any transfer until life-threatening problems have been
     identiﬁed and managed, and a secondary survey has been completed.
     Once the decision to transfer has been made, do not waste time
     performing non-essential diagnostic procedures that do not change the
     immediate plan of care. First, secure the airway (with tracheal intubation
     if necessary). Ensure that patients with pneumothoraces and chest injuries
     likely to be associated with pneumothoraces have intercostal drains
     inserted prior to transfer. This is particularly important before sending a
     patient by helicopter or ﬁxed wing transfer. Consider the need to insert a
     urinary catheter and a gastric tube.
     Arranging the transfer
     Speak directly to the doctor at the receiving hospital. Provide the following
     details by telephone or telemedicine link:
     • Details of the patient (full name, age, and date of birth).
     • A brief history of the onset of symptoms/injury.
     • The pre-hospital ﬁndings and treatment.
     • The initial ﬁndings, diagnosis, and treatment in the ED and the response
       to treatment.
     Write down the name of the doctor responsible for the initial reception
     of the patient after transfer. Establish precisely where within the receiving
     hospital the patient is to be taken. Where possible, prepare the receiving
     unit by sending details ahead by fax/email. Pre-printed forms can help in
     structuring the relevant details and avoiding omissions.
     Preparing for transfer
     Transfer team
     If the patient to be transferred may require advanced airway care, ensure
     they are accompanied by a doctor who can provide this. The accompanying
     nurse should be trained in resuscitation with a good knowledge of the
     equipment used during transfer.
     Equipment
     ‘Transfer cases’ containing a standardized list of equipment must be
     immediately available and regularly checked. Take all the emergency
     equipment and drugs that might prove necessary to maintain the ‘Airway’,
     ‘Breathing’ and ‘Circulation’ (ABC) during transfer. In particular, take at
     least twice the amount of O2 estimated to be necessary (a standard ‘F’
     cylinder contains 1360 L of O2 and will therefore last <3hr running at 10L/
     min). Before leaving, ensure that the patient and stretcher are well-secured
     within the ambulance. Send all cross-matched blood (in a suitably insulated
     container) with the patient.
                                                     PATIENT TRANSFER           23

Monitoring during transfer
Minimum monitoring during transfer includes ECG monitoring, pulse
oximetry, and non-invasive BP measurement. If the patient is intubated
and ventilated, end-tidal carbon dioxide (CO2) monitoring is mandatory.
An intra-arterial line is recommended, to monitor BP during the journey.
Make allowances for limited battery life on long transfers: spare batteries
may be needed. Plug monitors and other equipment into the mains supply
whenever possible.
Accompanying documentation
Include the following:
• Patient details: name, date of birth, address, next of kin, telephone
  numbers, hospital number, GP.
• History, examination ﬁndings, and results of investigations (including
  X-ray ﬁlms).
• Type and volume of all ﬂuids infused (including pre-hospital).
• Management including drugs given (type, route, and time of
  administration), practical procedures performed.
• Response to treatment, including serial measurements of vital signs.
• Name of referring and receiving doctors, their hospitals, and telephone
  numbers.
Some departments use standard forms to ensure that important
information is complete.
The relatives
Keep the patient’s relatives informed throughout. Explain where and why
the patient is going. Document what they have been told. Arrange transport
for relatives to the receiving hospital.
Before leaving
Prior to transfer, re-examine the patient. Check that the airway is
protected, ventilation is satisfactory, chest drains are working, IV cannulae
patent and well secured, and that the spine is appropriately immobilized,
but pressure areas protected. Ensure that the patient is well-covered to
prevent heat loss. Inform the receiving hospital when the patient has left
and give an estimated time of arrival.
After leaving
Communicate to the receiving hospital the results of any investigations
that become available after the patient has left. Contact the receiving
doctor afterwards to conﬁrm that the transfer was completed satisfactorily
and to obtain feedback.
Intra-hospital transfers
In many respects, the only difference between intra- and inter-hospital
transfers is the distance. The principles involved in organizing a transfer
are the same, whether the patient is to be conveyed to the computed
tomography (CT) scanner down the corridor, or to the regional
neurosurgical unit miles away.
24    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Breaking bad news
     A proportion of patients presenting to the ED have life-threatening
     conditions and some will die in the department. Often, the event will be
     sudden and unexpected by family and friends. It may already involve other
     family members (eg in the context of a road trafﬁc collision). In contrast to
     hospital inpatients or those in general practice, an opportunity to forewarn
     relatives as to what has happened or the eventual outcome is unlikely.
     The relatives may already be distressed after witnessing the incident or
     collapse, and may have been directly involved in providing ﬁrst aid.
     It is inappropriate for junior hospital staff without suitable experience to
     speak with distressed or bereaved relatives. The task must be undertaken
     by someone with sufﬁcient seniority and authority, who also has the skills
     of communication and empathy. The most important component is time.
     Reception
     Relatives usually arrive separately and after the patient. Anticipate
     this by designating a member of staff to meet them and show them to
     a relatives’ room, which should afford privacy, comfortable seating, an
     outside telephone line, tea, coffee, and toilet facilities. Paper tissues, some
     magazines, and toys for small children are useful.
     While the relatives are waiting, a designated nurse should stay with them
     to act as a link with the department and the team caring for the patient.
     This nurse can pre-warn relatives of the life-threatening nature of the
     patient’s condition and assist in building (an albeit short) relationship
     between staff and relatives. The link nurse should also check that
     important details have been recorded correctly, eg the patient’s name,
     address, date of birth, religion (in case last rites are required), next of kin
     (name, relationship to patient, address and phone no.), and the patient’s
     GP. This information should be collected as soon as possible, since later
     the relatives may be too upset to remember all these details or it may be
     difﬁcult to ask for them.
     Breaking the news
     Irrespective of who performs this task, remember a number of points. If
     you are the person who informs the relatives, ensure the link nurse is with
     you. After leaving the resuscitation room or clinical area, allow a minute
     or two of preparation to make yourself presentable, checking clothing for
     bloodstains, etc. Conﬁrm that you know the patient’s name. Enter the
     room, introduce yourself, and sit or kneel by the relatives so that you are
     at their physical level. Ensure that you speak with the correct relatives and
     identify who is who. Speak slowly, keep your sentences short and non-
     technical. Do not hedge around the subject. In their emotional turmoil,
     relatives very often misconstrue information. Therefore, you may need to
     re-emphasize the important aspects.
     For many critically ill patients, their ultimate prognosis cannot be deter-
     mined in the ED. In these situations, do not raise unrealistic expectations
     or false hopes, but be honest and direct with the relatives and the patients.
                                                    BREAKING BAD NEWS             25

If the patient has died, then use the words ‘death’ or ‘dead’. Do not use
euphemisms such as ‘passed away’, or ‘gone to a better place’.
After giving the news, allow relatives a few minutes to collect their
thoughts and ask questions. In some cases, these may be unanswerable. It is
better to say ‘we don’t yet know’, rather than confuse or give platitudinous
answers.
Common responses to bad news or bereavement include emotional
distress, denial, guilt, and aggression. The feelings of guilt and anger can
be particularly difﬁcult to come to terms with, and relatives may torture
themselves with the idea that if only their actions had been different, the
situation would never have arisen, or the clinical outcome would have been
different.
Relatives seeing patients
Many relatives wish to see or touch their loved ones, however brieﬂy.
Television and cinema have prepared much of the population for the sights
and sounds in the ED. In some departments, relatives are encouraged to
be present in the resuscitation room. In selected situations the stratagem
has beneﬁts. If the relatives are present during resuscitation, it is essential
that the link nurse is present with the relatives to provide support, explain
what is happening, and accompany them if they wish to leave.
More frequently, the relatives can see the patient in the resuscitation room
brieﬂy or while they are leaving the ED (eg to go to CT scan room or
theatre). Even a few seconds, a few words, and a cuddle can be immensely
rewarding for both relative and patient. The link nurse can give guidance
beforehand as to the presence of injuries (especially those involving the
face), monitors, drips, and equipment, to diminish any threatening impact
that these may have.
When death occurs
Even before death has occurred, involvement of religious leaders is valuable.
As early as possible, inform the hospital chaplain, who can provide
invaluable help to relatives and staff.
When a patient has died, offer the relatives the opportunity to see the
body. This contact, which should be in a private quiet room, can greatly
assist in the grieving process. With careful preparation, most patients who
have died from multiple injuries can be seen by relatives in this fashion.
Remember that followers of some faiths, such as Muslims and Hindus,
have important procedures and rituals to be followed after death,
although these may not always be feasible after a sudden death, especially
from trauma. In such situations, discuss the matter with the Coroner’s or
Procurator Fiscal’s ofﬁcer, and obtain help from an appropriate religious
leader to look after the bereaved relatives.
26    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     What to do after a death
     Who to contact
     Any suspicious death must be immediately reported to the Police who
     will liaise directly with the Coroner or Procurator Fiscal (in Scotland).
     Following all deaths in the ED, a number of important contacts must be
     made as soon as possible:
     • Informing the next of kin: if the relatives are not already present in ED, it
       may be necessary to ask the Police for assistance.
     • Notifying the Coroner (Procurator Fiscal in Scotland).
     • Informing the patient’s GP.
     • Cancelling hospital outpatient appointments.
     • Informing social work and health visitor teams as appropriate.
     Ensure deceased’s relatives are given information about the process
     for death certiﬁcation and registration, and how to organize funeral
     arrangements. Most EDs have useful leaﬂets that cover these matters and
     can answer many questions. Some departments have formal arrangements
     for counselling after bereavement. Often the GP is the best individual
     to co-ordinate bereavement care, but in any event, give the relatives a
     telephone number for the ED so they can speak to a senior nurse or
     doctor if they need further information or help.
     Information for the Coroner or Procurator Fiscal
     Report sudden deaths as soon as possible to the Coroner (in Scotland
     the Procurator Fiscal). It is helpful to give the following information if it
     is available:
     • Patient’s name, address, date of birth.
     • Next of kin (name, relationship, address, phone no.).
     • Patient’s GP.
     • Date and time of patient’s arrival in the ED.
     • Date and time of patient’s death.
     • Name and job title of doctor who pronounced death.
     • Details of the incident, injuries, or illness.
     • Relevant past medical history.
     • When the patient last saw a doctor (the Coroner may be happy for a
        GP or hospital doctor to write a death certiﬁcate if they saw the patient
        recently for the condition that caused death, eg a patient with known
        terminal cancer).
     • The patient’s religion: some faiths may wish to arrange burial before the
        next sunset, but this may not be feasible after a sudden death.
     • Anything else that is important, eg difﬁculties in communication with
        the next of kin due to language or deafness.
                                        WHAT TO DO AFTER A DEATH                27

Looking after the staff
The death of a patient or the management of patients with critical illness
inevitably affects the ED staff. This is particularly so when some aspect of
the event reminds staff of their own situation or relatives. These episodes
often occur at the busiest times and when everyone in the ED is working
under pressure.
One of the most difﬁcult situations is to have to inform parents of the
death of their child and help them in the initial grieving process, and then
return to the busy department where many people are waiting with
increasingly strident demands. It would be easy to respond that such
individuals, with injuries or illnesses that are minor or present for days or
weeks, are time-wasting. However, this approach will lead to conﬂict and
is unfair to all concerned. Instead, take 5−10min for a break in the staff
room before returning to the fray. Remember that in these circumstances
you too are a patient. Even senior and experienced staff may be distressed
after difﬁcult resuscitation situations and may require support.
Organ donation
There is considerable potential to assist with the process of organ/tissue
donation in the ED. However, the possibility of organ donation is sadly
often overlooked in the ED. Many patients who die after unexpected
cardiac arrest are potential donors of corneal tissue and heart valves.
Kidneys may also be retrieved from some patients who have died in the
ED, if a protocol for this has been arranged with the transplant team and
the local Coroner or Procurator Fiscal. Many other patients who are
moribund, intubated and ventilated (eg following massive subarachnoid
haemorrhage) may be identiﬁed as potential donors of other tissues
also. Consider the possibility of organ donation in patients who die in the
ED or who are moribund with no hope of survival. Most hospitals have
specialist organ donation nurses (previously known as ‘donor transplant
coordinators’) who will educate, advise and assist with the process of
organ donation. Useful information about organ/tissue transplantation is
available on the website of the British Transplantation Society (www.bts.
org.uk).
28    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Medicolegal aspects: avoiding trouble
     Medicolegal problems are relatively common in the ED. Many of these
     problems may be avoided by adopting the correct approach.
     Attitude
     Be polite and open with patients. Try to establish a good rapport. Be as
     honest as possible in explaining delays/errors.
     Consent (see General Medical Council guidance)
     Use the consent form liberally for anything that is complex, risky, or
     involves sedation or general anaesthetic (GA). Ensure that the patient
     understands what is involved in the procedure, together with its potential
     beneﬁts and risks. Whenever possible, attempt to obtain consent from
     parent/guardian in minors, but do not delay life-saving treatment in order
     to obtain consent.
     Documentation (b Note keeping, p.4)
     Good notes imply good practice. Keep careful notes, using simple, clear,
     unambiguous language. Write your name legibly and document the time
     that you saw the patient. Remember that successful defence of a medical
     negligence claim may depend upon accurate, legible, comprehensive,
     contemporaneous notes. Try to avoid abbreviations, particularly where
     there is room for confusion. In particular, name the digits of the hand
     (thumb, index, middle, ring, and little ﬁngers) and specify right or left by
     writing it in full.
     Be meticulous in documenting the nature, size, and position of any wounds
     (b p.402). Write down a diagnosis, together with a full interpretation
     of any investigations. Ensure that all attached documents (nursing
     observations, blood results, ECG) are labelled. Document all instructions
     and advice given to the patient, together with any follow-up arrangements
     made.
     Referral (b Discharge, referral, and handover, p.8)
     Always seek senior help or refer those patients with problems beyond
     your knowledge or expertise. Record any referral made, together with
     the name and grade of the doctor referred to, the time it was made, and
     a summary of the facts communicated. After referral, be cautious about
     accepting telephone advice alone—an expert cannot usually provide an
     accurate opinion without seeing the patient.
     Return visits
     Take special care with any patient who returns to ED with the same
     presenting complaint, because it is no better, has deteriorated, or the
     patient is simply dissatisﬁed. Do not automatically rely upon previous
     diagnosis and X-ray interpretations as being correct—treat the patient as
     if they were attending for the ﬁrst time. Try to involve the consultant in
     these cases.
                         MEDICOLEGAL ASPECTS: AVOIDING TROUBLE                     29

Discharge against advice
Always attempt to persuade the patient to accept the treatment offered,
but if this is refused, or the patient leaves before being seen, ask the patient
to sign an appropriate form. Patients not deemed competent (see Mental
Capacity Act below) to make this decision may need to be held against
their wishes—seek senior help with this. Write full notes explaining what
happened.
Mental Capacity Act (b p.629)
The Mental Capacity Act 2005 outlines how a person is unable to make a
decision for himself if he/she is unable to:
• Understand the information relevant to the decision.
• Retain the information.
• Use or weight that information as part of the process of making the
  decision.
• Communicate his/her decision.
A patient lacks capacity if at the time he/she is unable to make a decision
for himself/herself in relation to the matter because of an impairment or a
disturbance in the functioning of the mind or brain.
Access to records
All ED staff should bear in mind that patients may gain access to their
medical records and read what has been written about them. Patients in
the UK have a statutory right of access to information about themselves
(set out in the Data Protection Act 1998) and this includes medical
records. Competent patients may apply for access to, and copies of, their
own records. Applications are usually made in writing via the hospital’s
legal department.
Medical defence organization
Join a medical defence organization. The Medical Defence Union (MDU),
MDDUS, and Medical Protection Society provide professional indemnity
cover for emergencies outside hospital, and advice and support for all
sorts of medicolegal matters that are not necessarily covered by NHS
trusts, eg statements to the Coroner or Procurator Fiscal, support at
inquests or fatal accident inquiries, allegations of negligence, legal actions,
and problems with the GMC. They also provide members with useful
information and booklets about consent, conﬁdentiality and other issues.
Further information
www.the-mdu.com/hospital
www.mddus.com
www.medicalprotection.org
30    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Medicolegal aspects: the law
     Conﬁdentiality
     Medical information about every patient is conﬁdential and should not
     be disclosed without the patient’s consent. In the UK the police do not
     have routine access to clinical information, but some information may be
     divulged in certain speciﬁc circumstances:
     • The Road Trafﬁc Act (1972) places a duty on any person to provide
       the police, if requested, with information that might lead to the
       identiﬁcation of a vehicle driver who is suspected of an offence under
       the Act. The doctor is obliged to supply the person’s name and address,
       but not clinical information.
     • Suspicion of terrorist activity.
     • Gunshot wounds (see www.gmc-uk.org).
     • Disclosure in the public interest. The General Medical Council advises
       that this might include situations where someone may be exposed to
       death or serious injury (eg murder, rape, armed robbery, child abuse).
       Although this may provide ethical permission for the doctor to reveal
       details without consent, it does not place him/her under any legal
       duty to do so. Discuss these cases with your consultant and/or your
       medical defence organization. (General Medical Council (GMC) advice:
       www.gmc-uk.org).
     Ability to drive
     A patient’s ability to drive may be impaired by injury (especially limb or
     eye), by drugs (eg after GA, opiates, alcohol) or medical conditions (eg
     TIAs, epilepsy, arrhythmias). In each case, warn the patient not to drive and
     ensure that this warning is documented in the notes. It may be prudent to
     provide this warning in the presence of a close relative.
     For further information on medical aspects of ﬁtness to drive see:
     www.dft.gov.uk/dvla/medical/ataglance.aspx
     Police requests for blood alcohol
     In the UK, the police may request a blood or urine sample under
     Section 5 of the Road Trafﬁc Act (1988) from a patient they suspect to
     have been in charge of a motor vehicle with an illegal blood alcohol level
     (>80mg/100mL). In such circumstances, specimens should only be taken
     if they do not prejudice the proper care and treatment of the patient.
     The relevant specimens should only be taken by a police surgeon (clinical
     forensic physician) and with the patient’s consent.
     A change in the law (Police Reform Act 2002) also allows a police surgeon
     to take a blood sample from an unconscious patient who is suspected
     of having been the driver of a motor vehicle while under the inﬂuence
     of alcohol and/or drugs. The blood sample is retained and tested later,
     depending upon the patient later giving consent. Again, only permit the
     police surgeon access to the patient if this will not delay or prejudice
     proper care and treatment of the patient.
                                     MEDICOLEGAL ASPECTS: THE LAW                 31

Reporting deaths to the Coroner (or Procurator Fiscal)
Many deaths that occur in (or in transit to) the ED are sudden and
unexpected, and/or follow trauma. The exact cause of death is seldom
immediately apparent. Accordingly, do not be tempted to sign death
certiﬁcates. Instead, report all deaths to the Coroner (the Procurator
Fiscal in Scotland). See b p.26 for details of the information required.
Police statements
Do not provide information to the police until patient consent has been
obtained. Writing a police statement requires thought and care. Write
the statement yourself. Keep statements brief and try to avoid hearsay,
conjecture, or opinion on the likely outcome. List injuries using both
medical and non-medical language, explaining terminology in detail as
necessary. State the investigations and treatment provided as accurately
as possible (eg what sutures and how many were used). Having written
the statement, ask your consultant to read it and comment on it. Get
the statement typed (a friendly ED secretary may help if you cannot
type yourself, and will also know how you can claim the relevant fee).
Having checked it, sign and date the statement, and give it to the ofﬁcer
concerned. Always keep a copy of the statement and the ED notes, so
that they are easily available if you are called to court.
Court appearances
In advance Discuss the case with your consultant, and review the notes,
the questions that you might be asked, and the likely court procedures.
Get a good copy of the notes and any investigations. Ask whether you
should take the original records to court.
On the day Dress smartly, arrive early, and behave professionally. Be
prepared for a long wait, so take a book to read. Turn off your mobile
phone. Once in court, you have the option of taking an oath before God
or afﬁrming without religious connotation. You are equally bound to tell
the truth whichever you choose. Use the same form of address that others
have already used (eg ‘My Lord’, ‘Your Honour’). Answer directly and
simply. Use comprehensible language, free of medical jargon. Remember
that you are a professional witness, not an expert. Therefore, conﬁne
the expression of opinion to within the limits of your knowledge and
experience—if asked something outside this, say so!
Inquest/fatal accident inquiry If you are called to give evidence at an inquest
(in Scotland, a fatal accident inquiry), discuss the case with your consultant
and also with your medical defence society.
Further information and advice about reports and appearing in court
The medical defence organizations (b p.29) have useful advice sheets for
their members about writing reports and appearing in court.
32    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Infection control and prevention
     Staff in the ED have an important role in preventing and controlling
     infection, which can be a serious risk to patients, relatives, and staff.
     Organisms such as Staph. aureus, including MRSA (b p.235), can readily
     be transmitted by contaminated hands or equipment, causing infection of
     wounds, fractures, and in-dwelling devices (eg catheters or chest drains).
     Infected blood can transmit many infections, including hepatitis B and C
     (b p.239) and human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV; b p.242). Viral gas-
     troenteritis is usually spread by the faecal-oral route, but vomiting may
     cause widespread viral contamination of the surroundings and equipment,
     with a risk of transmission to other patients and staff.
     Coughing and sneezing produces small droplets of infected secretions,
     which could involve viruses such as inﬂuenza (b Inﬂuenza pandemics,
     avian ﬂu, and swine ﬂu, p.252), severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS;
     b p.251), and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV; b p.682). A nebulizer
     used on an infected patient may spread respiratory viruses widely, as
     occurred in the outbreak of SARS in Hong Kong in 2003 which involved
     many ED staff.
     Standard precautions for preventing infection
     Standard precautions (also known as ‘universal precautions’) should be
     used at all times and with all patients to reduce the risks of infection.
     Blood and body ﬂuids from all patients should be treated as infected.
     These standard precautions include:
     • Hand hygiene Essential, but often neglected. Decontaminate your hands
       before and after every patient contact, and after any activity that might
       contaminate hands, including removing gloves. Hands that are visibly
       dirty or possibly grossly contaminated must be washed with soap and
       water, and dried thoroughly. Alcohol hand gel can be used if the hands
       look clean. Cover broken skin with a waterproof dressing.
     • Personal protective equipment (PPE) Wear suitable disposable gloves
       for any contact with blood, body ﬂuids, mucous membranes, or non-
       intact skin. Latex gloves are widely used, but cause allergic reactions in
       some patients and staff, who need special nitrile gloves. Use a disposable
       plastic apron if there is a risk of blood or body ﬂuids contaminating
       clothing. After use, dispose of it and wash your hands. Impervious
       gowns are needed if there is a high risk of contamination. Use a mask,
       face shield, and eye protection if blood or body ﬂuids might splash in
       your eyes or mouth. Protection against respiratory viruses, eg SARS
       or inﬂuenza requires special masks or respirators (eg FFP3), which must
       be ﬁtted and used properly. Powered air-purifying respirators should be
       used for high-risk procedures such as intubating patients with serious
       viral infections.
     • Safe handling and disposal of sharps Avoid handling needles directly or
       using hand-held needles. Never re-sheathe needles. Place used needles
       and blades immediately into a ‘sharps bin’. If possible, use safety needles
       and cannulae, which reduce the risk of needlestick injury. If, despite
       all precautions, a needlestick injury does occur follow local approved
                             INFECTION CONTROL AND PREVENTION                   33

  procedures to minimize the risk of infection and look after the people
  involved (see b Needlestick injury, p.418).
• Managing blood and bodily ﬂuids Samples of blood or other body ﬂuids
  must be handled safely, with care not to contaminate request forms
  or the outside of the container. Follow local approved procedures
  for dealing with spillages of blood or body ﬂuids: wear suitable PPE
  (usually a disposable apron and gloves) and disinfect the spillage with an
  appropriate agent such as diluted bleach.
Planning for outbreaks of infectious diseases
Planning to cope with an outbreak of a serious infectious disease such
as SARS or pandemic ﬂu (b p.252) is a considerable challenge for ED
staff and for the whole community. The ED must be organized so that
patients can be assessed properly with a minimum risk of infecting staff or
other patients. If possible, patients with serious airborne diseases should
be treated in negative pressure isolation rooms by staff in appropriate PPE
who are fully trained to minimize the risks of spreading and acquiring the
infection. In high risk situations a ‘buddy’ system for staff may be helpful,
with each doctor or nurse being watched closely by another person to
check that full safety precautions are maintained.
Assessment of febrile patients
Hospitals in Hong Kong with experience of SARS use the FTOCC criteria
when assessing febrile patients for potentially serious infectious diseases:
• F—fever (>38°C).
• T—travel history.
• O—occupational history.
• C—clustering of cases.
• C—contact history (eg someone with SARS or avian ﬂu).
Similar criteria are used in the UK Health Protection Agency’s algorithm:
www.hpa.org.uk/Topics/InfectiousDiseases/InfectionsAZ/AvianInﬂuenza/
Further information
Standard precautions
www.rcn.org.uk/downloads/publications/public_pub/002725.pdf
Masks and respirators
www.hpa.org.uk/Topics/InfectiousDiseases/InfectionsAZ/SevereAcute
RespiratorySyndrome/Guidelines/sars040Facemasksand respiratorsFAQ/
Pandemic inﬂuenza/avian ﬂu
b Inﬂuenza pandemic, avian ﬂu, and swine ﬂu, p.252.
SARS
b SARS, p.251.
34    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     What to carry in your car
     If you are interested in out of hospital work, join the British Association for
     Immediate Care (BASICS: www.basics.org.uk), which is a valuable source
     of information and expertise. It can give advice on clothing, medical and
     protective equipment and their suppliers, and Immediate Care courses.
     The equipment that could be carried is extensive. In the UK, except in
     the most remote situations, it is likely that an ambulance will be on scene
     quickly. Emergency ambulances carry many items of equipment, eg for
     intubation, volume infusion and splintage, and also some drugs. There is a
     risk of carrying too much equipment in your car and getting diverted from
     the primary aims of pre-hospital care, which are to perform only relevant
     life-saving techniques, and to transfer the patient rapidly and safely to the
     nearest appropriate hospital.
     The equipment listed below is a personal choice based on experience
     attending out-of-hospital calls over the past 20 years:
     Personal equipment
     • High quality wind/waterproof reﬂective jacket and over-trousers. If your
       ﬁnances do not run to this, at least have a reﬂective ‘Doctor’ tabard.
     • Protective helmet.
     • Protective footwear—leather boots with steel toecaps are ideal.
     • 2 pairs of latex gloves.
     • 1 pair of protective gloves (eg leather gardening gloves).
     General equipment
     • Reﬂective warning triangle.
     • Fire extinguisher.
     • Heavy-duty waterproof torch.
     • Clothes-cutting scissors.
     • Mobile phone.
                                       WHAT TO CARRY IN YOUR CAR                35

Medical equipment
The equipment listed is only of value if you know how to use it, it is secure
(ie locked in a case in a locked vehicle), and it is in date:
• Stethoscope.
• Hand-held suction device + Yankauer and soft ﬂexible suckers.
• Laryngoscope, adult curved blade, spare batteries, and bulb.
• Selection of tracheal tubes of varying sizes + syringe to inﬂate cuff.
• Magill’s forceps.
• Selection of oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal airways.
• Laerdal pocket mask.
• Venous tourniquet.
• Selection of IV cannulae (2 each of 14G and 16G) and syringes.
• 2 × IV-giving sets.
• 2 × 1000mL 0.9% saline bags.
• 1 roll of 1-inch zinc oxide tape.
• 1 roll of 3-inch Elastoplast.
• Small selection of dressings and bandages.
• Cervical collar.
• Cricothyrotomy kit.
• Intercostal chest drain set.
• 2 × 0/0 silk suture on a hand-held cutting needle.
• Local anaesthetic, eg lidocaine 1% (for nerve blocks).
• Splints for IV cannulation sites.
36    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     At the roadside
     Priorities
     It is easy in an emergency to forget the simplest, most life-saving
     procedures. At worst, an individual trying to help can aggravate the
     situation, slow the process of care, and even become a casualty
     themselves.
     If you arrive ﬁrst at the scene of a collision, the initial priority is to ensure your
     own safety and that of other rescuers.
     • Park safely so your car will not obstruct other vehicles (including
        emergency vehicles), preferably where its presence will alert other road
        users to the collision. Put your hazard warning lights on. If you have a
        warning beacon, put it on the roof of the car and switch it on.
     • If you have a mobile phone, dial ‘999’ and request ambulance, ﬁre, and
        police to attend. Remember to give the exact location, a brief description
        of the incident, and number of casualties. Tell the emergency service
        operator who you are, as well as the number of your mobile phone.
     • Switch off the engine of your car and of any other vehicles.
     • Ensure that no-one is smoking or displays a naked ﬂame.
     • Events involving electricity or chemicals have speciﬁc hazards.
        Involvement of overhead or underground electric cables poses risks,
        compounded if water is involved or sparks produced. The risk from high
        tension cables extends for several metres. Phone the power company
        to ensure that the source is turned off before approaching. Electriﬁed
        rail lines may be short-circuited by a trained individual using a special
        bar carried in the guard’s compartment.
     Chemical incidents
     Do not approach a chemical incident until declared safe by the Fire
     Service. Lorries carrying hazardous chemicals must display a ‘Hazchem’
     board (see Fig. 1.2). This has:
     • Information on whether the area should be evacuated, what protective
        equipment should be worn, aspects relating to ﬁre-ﬁghting, and if the
        chemical can be safely washed down storm drains (top left). A white
        plate means that the load is non-toxic.
     • A 4-digit UN product identiﬁcation number (middle left).
     • A pictorial hazard diamond warning (top right).
     • An emergency contact number (bottom).
     The European ‘Kemler’ plate contains only the UN product number
     (bottom) and a numerical hazard code (top)—a repeated number means
     intensiﬁed hazard. Mixed loads <500kg may only be identiﬁed by a plain
     orange square at the front and rear of the vehicle.
     The transport emergency card (TREM card) carried in the driver’s cab
     gives information about the chemical for use at the scene of a crash. The
     ﬁre tender may be equipped with CHEMDATA—a direct link with the
     National Chemical Information Centre at Harwell. Alternatively, contact
     a Poisons Information Centre or the transport company.
     Helicopters
     If helicopters are used for transport/evacuation, remember:
     • Communications in or near helicopters are difﬁcult because of the noise.
     • Ensure any loose objects are secured to prevent them being blown away.
                                                                              AT THE ROADSIDE                           37

• Never enter the landing space area during landing or take-off.
• Never enter or leave the rotor disc area without the pilot’s permission.
• Duck down in the rotor disc area and only approach in full view of the pilot.
• If the helicopter cannot land and the winch is used, do not touch the cable
  before it has touched the ground to earth any static electrical charge.

                Hazchem advice for the control of the chemical

                                                                                  Hazard symbol and
   Substance
                            4WE                                                     description in a
                                                                                  diamond on white
 identification                                           Corrosive
  number and                2513
                              Bromoacetyl bromide
                                                                                  square background
                                                                                 (rest of label is black
     name                                                                           lettering on an
                    Specialist advice                               Pace
                                              0705 826435        transport        orange backround)

                 Specialist advice                       Suppliers name
              and telephone number                         (optional)

                                              Danger labels
                                                                              Oxyg                       0   72
                                                                                  en   O2         U.N. 1
                        Marine pollutant
                                                                                        Compressed
                                                                                           gas

        9       Other dangerous
                   substance                      Multiload

                   Green                         White                       Red                                  Red

    Compressed                     Poision                    Flammable                      Flammable
       gas                           gas                          gas                           liquid
        2                             2                            2                               2

                  Red/white
                   stripes                       White                       Blue                            Yellow

     Flammable                  Spont aneously                                              Oxidising agent
        solid                    combustible
         4.1                            4.1                                                      5.1
                         Red

                  Yellow                         White                       White

     Organic                      Harmful                      Toxic
                                  stow a way                                                  Corrosive
     peroxide                        from
                                   foodstuffs                                                     8
        5.2                             6.1                      6.1                                          Black

Fig. 1.2 Hazchem advice and danger labels.
38    CHAPTER 1 General approach

     Major incidents
     A major incident involves a lot of people. The casualties may have multiple
     injuries, minor injuries/burns, or other emergencies such as food poisoning
     or chemical inhalation. Every hospital accepting emergencies has a Major
     Incident plan to use when the normal resources are unable to cope and
     special arrangements are needed. There will be action cards for key staff
     detailing their duties. All staff need to familiarize themselves with their
     roles in advance.
     Call-in lists must be up to date and available at all times.
     Major incident practices must be held regularly to check arrangements and
     contact details and to remind staff what they should do.
     Alert
     The ambulance service or the police should warn the hospital of a possible
     or deﬁnite major incident. Initial messages are often inaccurate because
     they are based on confused and incomplete information from the scene.
     Occasionally, patients arrive without warning from a major incident near
     the hospital.
     Ensure that the ED consultant on duty is informed immediately of any
     suspected major incident, enabling them to participate in the decision
     to start the major incident procedure. Senior medical, nursing, and
     administrative staff will set up the hospital’s Control Centre and prepare
     for action. If the major incident is conﬁrmed, the full hospital response is
     initiated, following the procedures in the plan.
     Communications are vital, but switchboards rapidly become overloaded.
     Staff should therefore be called in using non-switchboard phones if
     possible. All staff should wear their identiﬁcation badges.
     Action in the ED
     • Check that the ED consultant and hospital switchboard know about the
       incident and that the major incident procedure has been started.
     • Inform all ED staff on duty (doctors, nurses, receptionists, porters).
     • Call in other ED staff in accordance with the Major Incident plan.
     • Clear the ED of any patients who are not seriously ill or injured. Prepare
       the department to receive patients from the incident.
     • Doctors and nurses arriving to help should be given appropriate action
       cards. Staff should have labels or tabards so that ED staff and other
       specialties (eg anaesthetists) can be identiﬁed easily.
     • Prepare a triage point at the ambulance entrance. This should be
       staffed by a senior doctor and nurse who direct patients to the most
       appropriate area of the department. If possible, a nurse should stay with
       each patient until he/she is discharged or admitted to a ward.
     • All patients should be labelled immediately with a unique Major Incident
       number, which is used on all notes, forms, blood samples, property
       bags, and lists of patients. Collect names, addresses, and other details as
       soon as possible, but this must not delay triage or emergency treatment.
       Keep lists of anyone leaving the ED.
     • Ensure that the hospital Control Centre is regularly updated regarding
       the situation in the ED.
                                                      MAJOR INCIDENTS          39

Wards and theatres
Beds must be cleared to receive patients, preferably on 1 or 2 wards,
rather than many different wards. A senior surgeon should triage patients
needing operations and co-ordinate theatre work.
Relatives and friends
Relatives and friends of casualties should be looked after by social workers
and chaplaincy staff in an area near to, but separate from, the ED, perhaps
in the outpatient department. Keep relatives informed as soon and as
much as possible. Security staff at each entrance to the ED should direct
relatives and friends of casualties to the appropriate area and not allow
them into the ED.
Press
Journalists and television crews will arrive rapidly after a major incident.
Keep them out of the ED—direct them to a pre-arranged room to be
briefed by a press ofﬁcer and senior staff.
Arrangements at the site of a major incident
The police are in overall command. The ﬁre service take control of the
immediate area if there is a ﬁre or chemical risk. The police, ﬁre, and
ambulance services will each have a control vehicle, with an Incident
Ofﬁcer to co-ordinate their staff and the rescue work.
There may be a Medical Incident Ofﬁcer (MIO) and also a Mobile Medical
Team of doctors and nurses, who should if possible be sent from a
supporting hospital, rather than the hospital receiving the ﬁrst casualties.
These staff must be properly clothed (yellow and green high-visibility
jacket marked ‘Doctor’ or ‘Nurse’, over trousers, green helmet with visor
and chin strap, safety boots, gloves, knee pads, torch, ID badge), and must
be trained and equipped with suitable medical supplies and action cards.
The mobile medical team must report to the MIO, who is in charge of all
medical and nursing staff on site and works closely with the Ambulance
Incident Ofﬁcer (AIO). The MIO should record the names of the mobile
medical team and brief them about their duties and the site hazards and
safety arrangements. The MIO is responsible for supervising the team,
arranging any necessary equipment and supplies, and making sure that the
team are relieved when necessary. The MIO and AIO relay information to
the hospitals and distribute casualties appropriately.
Debrieﬁng staff
Debrieﬁng is important after a major incident, so that staff can discuss
what happened and express their feelings. Mutual support of the team
is essential. Counselling may be required. Senior staff should prepare a
report on the incident and review the major incident plan.
Further information
NHS Emergency Planning guidance
www.dh.gov.uk/en/Managingyourorganisation/Emergencyplanning/index.htm
CBRN (Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear) incidents
b Decontamination of patients, p.211.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 2                                                         41

Life-threatening
emergencies

Anaphylaxis                                                   42
Treatment algorithm for adults with anaphylaxis               44
Choking                                                       45
Cardiac arrest                                                46
In-hospital resuscitation algorithm                           47
Adult basic life support                                      48
Cardiac arrest management                                     50
Advanced life support algorithm                               52
Notes on using the advanced life support algorithm            53
Post-resuscitation care                                       54
Central venous access                                         56
Severe sepsis and septic shock                                59
Shock                                                         60

 Life-threatening emergencies in children are considered in
 Chapter 15, Paediatric emergencies 631
    b Paediatric basic life support 646
    b Choking from a foreign body 648
    b Anaphylaxis in children 650
    b Paediatric advanced life support 652
42    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Anaphylaxis
     (Anaphylaxis in children is covered in b p.650)
     Anaphylaxis is a generalized immunological condition of sudden onset,
     which develops after exposure to a foreign substance. The mechanism may:
     • Involve an IgE-mediated reaction to a foreign protein (stings, foods,
       streptokinase), or to a protein–hapten conjugate (antibiotics) to which
       the patient has previously been exposed.
     • Be complement mediated (human proteins eg G-globulin, blood
       products).
     • Be unknown (aspirin, ‘idiopathic’).
     Irrespective of the mechanism, mast cells and basophils release mediators
     (eg histamine, prostaglandins, thromboxanes, platelet activating factors,
     leukotrienes) producing clinical manifestations. Angio-oedema caused by
     ACE inhibitors and hereditary angio-oedema may present in a similar way
     to anaphylaxis. Hereditary angio-oedema is not usually accompanied by
     urticaria and is treated with C1 esterase inhibitor.
     Common causes
     • Drugs and vaccines (eg antibiotics, streptokinase, suxamethonium,
       aspirin, non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), intravenous
       (IV) contrast agents).
     • Hymenoptera (bee/wasp) stings.
     • Foods (nuts, shellﬁsh, strawberries, wheat).
     • Latex.
     Clinical features
     The speed of onset and severity vary with the nature and amount of the
     stimulus, but the onset is usually in minutes/hours. A prodromal aura or a
     feeling of impending death may be present. Patients on B-blockers or with
     a history of ischaemic heart disease (IHD) or asthma may have especially
     severe features. Usually two or more systems are involved:
     Respiratory Swelling of lips, tongue, pharynx, and epiglottis may lead to
     complete upper airway occlusion. Lower airway involvement is similar to
     acute severe asthma—dyspnoea, wheeze, chest tightness, hypoxia, and
     hypercapnia.
     Skin Pruritus, erythema, urticarial, and angio-oedema.
     Cardiovascular Peripheral vasodilation and i vascular permeability cause
     plasma leakage from the circulation, with d intravascular volume, hypoten-
     sion, and shock. Arrhythmias, ischaemic chest pain, and electrocardiogram
     (ECG) changes may be present.
     GI tract Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal cramps.
                                                             ANAPHYLAXIS          43

Treatment
• Discontinue further administration of suspected factor (eg drug).
  Remove stings by scraping them carefully away from skin.
• Give 100% oxygen (O2).
• Open and maintain airway. If upper airway oedema is present, get
  specialist senior help immediately. Emergency intubation or a surgical
  airway and ventilation may be required.
• In patients with shock, airway swelling, or respiratory difﬁculty give 0.5mg
  (0.5mL of 1:1000 solution) adrenaline intramuscular (IM). Repeat after
  5min if there is no improvement. In adults treated with an adrenaline auto-
  injector (eg EpiPen®) the 300mcg dose is usually sufﬁcient, but additional
  doses may be required. Give only 50% of the usual dose of adrenaline to
  patients taking tricyclic antidepressants, MAOIs, or B–blockers.
• In profound shock or immediately life-threatening situations, give CPR/
  ALS as necessary, and consider slow IV adrenaline 1:10,000 or 1:100,000
  solution. This is recommended only for experienced clinicians who can
  also obtain immediate IV access. Note the different strength of adrenaline
  required for IV use. If there is no response to adrenaline, consider glucagon
  1–2mg IM/IV every 5min (especially in patients taking B-blockers).
• Give a B2-agonist (eg salbutamol 5mg) nebulized with O2 for
  bronchospasm, possibly with the addition of nebulized ipratropium
  bromide 500mcg.
• Give IV ﬂuid if hypotension does not rapidly respond to adrenaline.
  Rapid infusion of 1–2L IV 0.9% saline may be required, with further
  infusion according to the clinical state.
• Antihistamine H1 blockers (eg chlorphenamine 10–20mg slow IV) and
  H2 blockers (eg ranitidine 50mg IV) are commonly given. They are
  second line drugs that, with hydrocortisone 100–200mg slow IV, may
  reduce the severity/duration of symptoms.
• Admit/observe after initial treatment: prolonged reactions and biphasic
  responses may occur. Observe for at least 4–6hr after all symptoms
  have settled.
Report anaphylactic reactions related to drugs/vaccines to the Committee
on Safety of Medicines. Further investigation of the cause (and possibly
desensitization) may be indicated. Where identiﬁed, the patient and
GP must be informed and the hospital records appropriately labelled.
Medic-Alert bracelets are useful.
Notes on treatment algorithm on b p.44
1 An inhaled B2-agonist such as salbutamol may be used as an adjunctive
  measure if bronchospasm is severe and does not respond rapidly to
  other treatment.
2 If profound shock judged immediately life-threatening give CPR/ALS if
  necessary. Consider slow IV adrenaline (epinephrine) 1:10,000 solution.
  This is hazardous and is recommended only for an experienced practitioner
  who can also obtain IV access without delay. Note the different strength of
  adrenaline (epinephrine) that may be required for IV use.
3 If adults are treated with an EpiPen® the 300mcg will usually be sufﬁcient.
  A second dose may be required. Half doses of adrenaline (epinephrine)
  may be safer for patients on amitriptyline, imipramine, or B-blocker.
4 A crystalloid may be safer than a colloid.
44    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Treatment algorithm for adults with
     anaphylaxis1
                                      Anaphylactic reaction?

                   Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, Exposure

                   Diagnosis - look for:
                      • Acute onset of illness
                      • Life-threatening airway and/or breathing
                        and/or circulation problems1
                      • And usually skin changes

                                           Call for help
                                         • Lie patient flat
                                         • Raise patient’s legs

                                             Adrenaline2

                           When skills and equipment available:
                    • Establish airway
                    • High flow oxygen            Monitor:
                    • IV fluid challenge3         • Pulse oximetry
                    • Chlorphenamine4             • ECG
                    • Hydrocortisone5             • Blood pressure

     1 Life-threatening problems:
     Airway:        Swelling, hoarseness, stridor
     Breathing:     Rapid breathing, wheeze, fatigue, cyanosis, SpO2 < 92%, confusion
     Circulation: Pale, clammy, low blood pressure, faintness, drowsy/coma
      2 Adrenaline (give IM unless experienced with IV adrenaline)      3 IV fluid challenge:
      IM doses of 1:1000 adrenaline (repeat after 5 min if no better)
                                                                        Adult - 500–1000 mL
      • Adult:                     500 micrograms IM (0.5 mL)
                                                                        Child - crystalloid 20 mL/kg
      • Child more than 12 years: 500 micrograms IM (0.5 mL)
      • Child 6–12 years:          300 micrograms IM (0.3 mL)           Stop IV colloid
      • Child less than 6 years: 150 micrograms IM (0.15 mL)            if this might be the cause
       Adrenaline IV to be given only by experienced specialists        of anaphylaxis
         Titrate: Adults 50 micrograms; Children 1 microgram/kg

                                            4 Chlorphenamine                5 Hydrocortisone
                                               (IM or slow IV)                (IM or slow IV)
     Adult or child more than 12 years             10 mg                          200 mg
     Child 6–12 years                                5 mg                         100 mg
     Child 6 months to 6 years                     2.5 mg                         50 mg
     Child less than 6 months                250 micrograms/kg                     25 mg

       See also:        Anaphylactic reactions – Initial treatment

     Fig. 2.1 Anaphylaxis algorithm.

     1 Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines, 2008. See: www.resus.org.uk
                                                                             CHOKING         45

Choking
The management of choking is rightly taught as part of ﬁrst aid. Recognition
of the problem is the key to success. Clues include a person experiencing
a sudden airway problem whilst eating, possibly combined with them
clutching their neck.
Severity of airway obstruction
Victims with severe airway obstruction may be unable to speak or breathe
and become unconscious (see Fig. 2.2).

                                          Assess severity

                   Severe                                                  Mild
             Airway obstruction                                    Airway obstruction
             (ineffective cough)                                    (effective cough)

   Unconscious                Conscious                            Encourage cough

      Start CPR               5 back blows                      Continue to check for
                                                              deterioration to ineffective
                              5 abdominal                     cough or until obstruction
                                 thrusts                               relieved

Fig. 2.2 Adult choking algorithm.1

1 Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines, 2010 (www.resus.org.uk)
46    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Cardiac arrest
     Clinical features and recognition
     Follow resuscitation algorithm (www.resus.org.uk) shown opposite.
     Cardiac arrest is a clinical diagnosis:
     • Suspect cardiac arrest in any patient who is unconscious and who
       does not have signs of life. If you check a pulse, examine only for a
       major (carotid or femoral) one and take no longer than 10sec. Other
       ‘conﬁrmatory’ clinical features (eg colour, pupil size/response) waste
       time and do not help. Note that some respiratory efforts, such as
       gasping, may persist for several minutes after the onset of cardiac arrest.
       Occasionally, an arrest may present as a grand mal ﬁt of short duration.
     • Most patients have had a sudden and unexpected out-of-hospital event.
     Prior warning to the department is usually relayed by radio or direct
     telephone link from the Ambulance Service. While resuscitation is
     continued, ensure that accompanying relatives/friends are met and taken
     to an appropriate room, which has a telephone, facilities for making tea
     and coffee, and where privacy is possible. Arrange for a member of staff to
     stay with the relatives to act as a link with the Resuscitation Team.
     Information to obtain from ambulance crew/relatives
     • Patient details: including age, past medical history, current medication,
       chest pain before event
     • Times of : collapse (often an approximation), 999 (or 112) call, arrival on
       scene, start of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), ﬁrst deﬁbrillating
       shock (if appropriate), other interventions (eg advanced airway
       management, drugs), restoration of spontaneous circulation (ROSC)
     • Was there any bystander CPR?
     Where a patient in cardiac arrest is brought to hospital by ambulance, the
     cardiac arrest team (ED staff, the hospital team, or a combination of both)
     should already be present in the resuscitation room with all equipment
     ready to receive the patient.
     The team leader
     The team leader controls, co-ordinates, organizes the team and makes
     treatment decisions. 4–6 team members are optimal. Each should know
     their role. Perform resuscitation in a calm, quiet, conﬁdent manner with
     minimal interruption to the performance of basic life support (BLS) or
     deﬁbrillation.
     Start the following procedures simultaneously:
     • Continue BLS.
     • Remove/cut clothing from the upper body to allow deﬁbrillation,
       ECG monitoring, chest compression, and IV access.
     • Obtain the ECG trace (through deﬁbrillator pads or monitor leads).
       If already attached to an ECG monitor, note (print out if possible) the
       rhythm. Beware movement artefact, disconnected leads, electrical
       interference, etc.
     • Follow the ALS algorithm (b p.52).
     • Do not interrupt CPR except to perform deﬁbrillation.
                                  IN-HOSPITAL RESUSCITATION ALGORITHM                47

In-hospital resuscitation algorithm1

                                 Collapsed/sick patient

                         Shout for HELP and assess patient

                                            Signs
                  NO                                                YES
                                           of life?

      Call resuscitation team                                 Assess ABCDE
                                                             Recognise and treat
                                                             Oxygen, monitoring,
                                                                 IV access

           CPR 30:2
 with oxygen and airway adjuncts

                                                           Call resuscitation team
       Apply pads/monitor                                       if appropriate
       Attempt defibrillation
           if appropriate

     Advanced life support                                        Handover
 when resuscitation team arrives                            to resuscitation team

Fig. 2.3

1 Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines, 2010 (www.resus.org.uk).
48    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Adult basic life support
     Airway and ventilation
     Usually in the ED, advanced airway techniques will be used from the
     outset. If basic techniques are used (Fig. 2.4):
     • With the patient on his/her back, open the airway by tilting the head
       and lifting the chin. (Use jaw thrust instead if neck trauma suspected.)
     • Remove any visible obstructions from the mouth, but leave well-ﬁtting
       dentures in place.
     • Aim for each breath to last 81sec and make the chest rise. After each
       breath, maintain the head tilt/chin lift, take your mouth away from the
       patient’s and watch for the chest to fall as the air comes out.

     Fig. 2.4 Mouth to mouth ventilation.1

     1 Colquhoun MC et al. (1999). ABC of Resuscitation, 4th edition. BMJ Books, London.
                                                       ADULT BASIC LIFE SUPPORT       49

Technique for chest compression (Fig. 2.5)
• Place the heel of one hand over the middle of the lower half of the
  patient’s sternum, with the other hand on top. Extend or interlock
  the ﬁngers of both hands and lift them to avoid applying pressure to the
  patient’s ribs.
• Positioned above the patient’s chest and with arms straight, press down
  to depress the sternum 5–6cm.
• Release all the pressure and repeat at a rate of 100–120/min.
• Compression and release phases should take the same time.
• Use a ratio of 30 chest compressions to 2 ventilations (30:2).
• Aim to change the person providing chest compressions every 2 min,
  but ensure that this is achieved without causing signiﬁcant pauses.

Fig. 2.5 Chest compressions.1

1 Colquhoun MC et al. (1999). ABC of Resuscitation, 4th edition. BMJ Books, London.
50    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Cardiac arrest management
     Deﬁbrillation
     • Most survivors have an initial rhythm of VF/VT. The treatment for this
       is deﬁbrillation. With time, the chances of successful deﬁbrillation and
       survival d dramatically. Adhesive deﬁbrillator pads have replaced manual
       paddles in most hospitals. Place one pad to the right of the upper
       sternum below the clavicle, the other in mid-axillary line level with V6
       ECG electrode position. Avoid placement over the female breast. To
       avoid problems with pacemakers, keep pads >15cm away from them.
     • With biphasic deﬁbrillators, use shock energy of 150J, for (mostly older)
       monophasic deﬁbrillators, select 360J energy.
     • Plan for chest compressions to be as continuous as possible, with
       minimal delays. Having paused brieﬂy to assess the rhythm, recommence
       compressions until the deﬁbrillator is charged. Pause brieﬂy to deliver
       a shock (removing O2 sources and transdermal glycerol trinitrate
       (GTN) patches), then immediately restart CPR with 30:2 compressions:
       ventilation, and continue for 2min before reassessing the rhythm or
       feeling for a pulse.
     • In monitored patients with pulseless ventricular tachycardia/ﬁbrillation
       (VT/VF) where deﬁbrillation is not immediately available, give a single
       precordial thump. With a tightly clenched ﬁst, deliver one direct blow
       from a height of 820cm to the lower half of the sternum.
     Airway management
     Techniques for securing the airway, providing oxygenation and ventilation
     are covered in b Airway obstruction: basic measures, p.324. Although
     tracheal intubation has long been considered to be the gold standard
     deﬁnitive airway, only attempt this if suitably experienced. Laryngeal
     mask airway is a readily available, rapid alternative, which is easy to insert.
     Whatever method is used, aim to ventilate (preferably with 100% O2) using
     an inspiratory time of 1sec, a volume sufﬁcient to produce a normal rise of the
     chest, at a rate of 10/min. For patients with tracheal tubes or laryngeal mask
     airways, ventilate without interrupting chest compressions, which should be
     continuous (except for deﬁbrillation or pulse checks as appropriate).
     End-tidal CO2 monitoring is very useful to conﬁrm correct tracheal tube
     placement and indirectly measure cardiac output during CPR.
     Drugs
     There is little evidence that any drug improves outcome. Central venous
     cannulation is difﬁcult, has risks and interrupts CPR. Peripheral access
     is easy and quick. Having given a peripheral IV drug, give a 20mL saline
     bolus and elevate the limb for 10–20sec. If IV access is impossible, consider
     intraosseous route (b p.640). It is no longer recommended for any
     drugs to be given by tracheal tube. Similarly, do not attempt intracardiac
     injections.
     The ﬁrst drug used in cardiac arrest (after oxygen) is adrenaline. In
     the case of VF/VT, administer adrenaline after three shocks, whereas
     in asystole/PEA, give it as soon as possible (see b Adult life support
     algorithm, p.52).
                                         CARDIAC ARREST MANAGEMENT                     51

Non-shockable rhythms: PEA and asystole
Pulseless electrical activity (PEA) is the clinical situation of cardiac arrest with
an ECG trace compatible with cardiac output. PEA may be caused by:
• Failure of the normal cardiac pumping mechanism (eg massive MI,
  drugs such as B-blockers, Ca2+ antagonists or electrolyte disturbance,
  eg hypokalaemia, hyperkalaemia).
• Obstruction to cardiac ﬁlling or output (eg tension pneumothorax,
  pericardial tamponade, myocardial rupture, pulmonary embolism (PE),
  prosthetic heart valve occlusion, and hypovolaemia).
Prompt and appropriate correction of these can result in survival. Remember
potentially reversible causes as the 4H’s and 4T’s (see Table 2.1).

 Table 2.1
 4H’s                                    4T’s
 Hypoxia                                 Tension pneumothorax
 Hypovolaemia                            Tamponade (cardiac)
 Hyper/hypokalaemia/metabolic            Toxic substances (eg overdose)
 disorders
 Hypothermia                             Thromboembolic/mechanical obstruction

Asystole is the absence of cardiac (particularly ventricular) electrical activity.
If unsure if the rhythm is asystole or ﬁne VF, continue chest compressions
and ventilation in an attempt to increase the amplitude and frequency of
VF, and make it more susceptible to deﬁbrillation.
Length of resuscitation
The duration of the resuscitation attempt depends upon the nature of
the event, the time since the onset, and the estimated prospects for a
successful outcome. In general, continue resuscitation while VF/pulseless
VT persists, always provided that it was initially appropriate to commence
resuscitation. If VF persists despite repeated deﬁbrillation, try changing
pad position or deﬁbrillator.
Asystole unresponsive to treatment and arrests which last >1hr are rarely
associated with survival. However, exceptions occur—particularly in
younger patients, hypothermia, near drowning, and drug overdose.
Mechanical CPR
There are several devices available that can provide mechanical CPR.
These include the ‘AutoPulse’ circumferential load-distributing band chest
compression device (comprising a pneumatically actuated constricting band
and backboard) and the ‘LUCAS’ gas-driven sternal compression device (with
accompanying suction cup to provide active decompression). Widespread
use of these devices may develop if early encouraging results are conﬁrmed
by larger studies. Mechanical CPR is potentially very useful in situations where
the resuscitation attempt is prolonged (eg cardiac arrest associated with
hypothermia, poisoning or following ﬁbrinolytic treatment for PE), ensuring
consistent CPR over a long period of time and freeing up an additional
member of the team.
52    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Advanced life support algorithm1
                                                Unresponsive?
                                                Not breathing or
                                              only occasional gasps

                                                                                  Call
                                                                           resuscitation team

                                                  CPR 30:2
                                          Attach defibrillator/monitor
                                            Minimise interruptions

                                                      Assess
                                                      rhythm

               Shockable                                                           Non-Shockable
             (VF/Pulseless VT)                                                      (PEA/Asystole)

                                                     Return of
                  1 Shock                          spontaneous
                                                    circulation

           Immediately resume               Immediate post cardiac                Immediately resume
             CPR for 2 min                    arrest treatment                      CPR for 2 min
          Minimise interruptions            • Use ABCDE approach                 Minimise interruptions
                                            • Controlled oxygenation and
                                              ventilation
                                            • 12-lead ECG
                                            • Treat precipitating cause
                                            • Temperature control/
                                               therapeutic hypothermia

                        During CPR                                     Reversible causes
          • Ensure high-quality CPR: rate, depth, recoil       • Hypoxia
          • Plan actions before interrupting CPR               • Hypovolaemia
          • Give oxygen                                        • Hypo-/hyperkalaemia/metabolic
          • Consider advanced airway and capnography           • Hypothermia
          • Continuous chest compressions when advanced
             airway in place                                   • Thrombosis - coronary or pulmonary
          • Vascular access (intravenous, intraosseous)        • Tamponade - cardiac
          • Give adrenaline every 3–5 min                      • Toxins
          • Correct reversible causes                          • Tension pneumothorax

     Fig. 2.6

     1 Resuscitation Council (UK) guidelines, 2010 (www.resus.org.uk).
     NOTES ON USING THE ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT ALGORITHM                        53

Notes on using the advanced life
support algorithm
• Establish the underlying cardiac rhythm as quickly as possible in order to
  determine which ‘loop’ to follow to provide appropriate treatment—
  for VF/pulseless VT, the initial focus is deﬁbrillation and good CPR; for
  asystole/PEA, the initial focus is good CPR, IV adrenaline, and searching
  for potentially reversible causes.
• Do not interrupt CPR except to perform deﬁbrillation.
• Search for and correct potentially reversible causes of the arrest.
• Give IV adrenaline 1mg and amiodarone 300mg for VF/pulseless VT
  refractory to three shocks, followed by 1mg adrenaline every 3–5min.
  A further dose of 150mg IV amiodarone may be given for recurrent or
  refractory VF/VT. Lidocaine (1mg/kg) IV is an alternative to amiodarone,
  but do not give it if amiodarone has already been given.
• For torsade de pointes, and refractory VF in patients with suspected
  digoxin toxicity or hypomagnesaemia (eg on K+ losing diuretics), give IV
  magnesium sulphate 2g (= 8mmol = 4mL of 50% solution).
• In asystole and PEA, give IV 1mg adrenaline as soon as possible and
  thereafter every 3–5min.
• Exercise caution before using adrenaline in arrests associated with
  cocaine or other sympathomimetic drugs.
• Atropine is no longer routinely recommended in asystole or slow PEA.
• In PEA arrests associated with hyperkalaemia, hypocalcaemia, or Ca2+
  channel blocking drug or magnesium overdose, give 10mL 10% IV
  calcium chloride (6.8mmol).
• With good quality CPR, acidosis develops slowly. Do not ‘routinely’ give
  an alkali. Give 50mL of sodium bicarbonate 8.4% solution (50mmol) if
  arrest is associated with tricyclic overdose (b p.194) or hyperkalaemia
  and consider it in patients with severe acidosis (arterial pH<7.1, base
  excess less than –10). Allow further administration to be guided by
  repeated arterial blood gas (ABG) results.
• Follow loops of the algorithm for as long as it is considered appropriate
  for the resuscitation to continue. Provided that the attempt was
  commenced appropriately, it should not normally be stopped if the
  rhythm is still VF.
Pacing and external cardiac percussion
Pacing may be of value in patients with extreme bradyarrhythmias, but its
value in asystole is unproven (except for rare cases of trifascicular block
with P waves present). If there is a delay before pacing can be performed,
external cardiac percussion can provide a cardiac output and ‘buy time’.
Perform external cardiac percussion using a clenched ﬁst:
• Over the heart at a rate of 100/min.
• With a blow more gentle than a precordial thump.
• Each blow should generate a QRS complex. If this, and a detectable
  output, is not achieved restart conventional CPR.
54    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Post-resuscitation care
     Features such as coma or pupil reﬂexes are unreliable prognostic
     indicators in the early post-resuscitation phase. Accurate prognostication
     in an individual patient is rarely possible before 24–72hr. Involve the
     intensive care unit/critical care unit (ICU/CCU) team early.
     Pending this and following ROSC
     • Ensure that the airway is protected (b p.324).
     • Maintain oxygenation and ventilation. Correct hypoxia and prevent
       hypercapnoea under ABG guidance (may require IPPV). Use pulse
       oximetry to monitor SpO2 non-invasively, titrating inspired oxygen
       concentration to achieve SpO2 of 94–98%.
     • In intubated patients, insert an oro- or nasogastric tube to decompress
       the stomach.
     • Obtain a 12-lead ECG and a CXR (check position of tracheal tube,
       central lines and presence of pneumothorax etc.).
     • Optimize cardiac output: inotropes, vasodilators, ﬂuids and/or diuretics
       may be needed under haemodynamic monitoring guidance. If the arrest
       is associated with an acute coronary syndrome, consider immediate
       thrombolysis and/or coronary revascularization.
     • Cerebral blood ﬂow autoregulation is deﬁcient post-arrest. Maintaining
       arterial pressures ‘normal’ for the patient may prevent hypotensive
       hypoperfusion. i BP above the normal for the patient may worsen
       cerebral oedema.
     • Seizures aggravate brain injury by i ICP and cerebral metabolic
       requirements. Treat with appropriate anticonvulsants (as b p.149) and
       ensure adequate oxygenation and ventilation.
     • Measure U&E, Ca2+, Mg2+, and correct abnormalities appropriately.
     • Obtain full blood count (FBC) to exclude anaemia contributing to
       myocardial ischaemia and to provide an admission baseline.
     • Both hypo- and hyperglycaemia compromise neurological outcome.
       Monitor plasma glucose concentration regularly and aim to avoid both
       hypo- and hyperglycaemia (keep the level d10mmol/L).
     • No drug has been shown to improve cerebral outcome following
       cardiac arrest. The routine use of steroids, mannitol, Ca2+ channel
       blockers, etc., is unwarranted.
     • When any drug is used, remember that pharmacokinetic proﬁles
       are often impaired post-resuscitation. Dose adjustment and careful
       monitoring are needed.
     • Avoid/treat hyperthermia with antipyretic or active cooling.
     • There is compelling data to support the early induction of mild
       therapeutic hypothermia (32–34°C) in patients who are comatose
       following out of hospital VF arrest. Mild hypothermia is believed to be
       neuroprotective in this situation (and pending more data, may be of
       beneﬁt in other situations as well, eg other arrest rhythms, in-hospital
       arrests, paediatric patients). Cooling may be initiated by external
       techniques (cooling blankets, water or air circulating blankets) or
       internally by an infusion of 30mL/kg of 4°C 0.9% saline—liaise with ICU.
       Mild hypothermia is typically maintained for 12–24hr.
                                          POST-RESUSCITATION CARE            55

Training
Theoretical knowledge is important, but many of the skills required during
the management of a cardiac arrest need expert teaching and supervised
practice. Attend an approved Resuscitation Council (UK) Advanced Life
Support course (see www.resus.org.uk)—preferably before starting in
the ED.
56    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Central venous access
     Indications
     Central venous access may be required for:
     • Administration of emergency drugs.
     • Central venous pressure measurement.
     • Administration of IV ﬂuids, especially when peripheral veins are
       collapsed or thrombosed. Note: other routes (eg femoral vein) are
       generally preferable for giving large volumes rapidly.
     • Transvenous cardiac pacing.
     Choice of vein
     The external jugular vein is often readily visible and can be cannulated
     easily with a standard IV cannula.
     The internal jugular and subclavian veins are generally used for central
     venous access in the ED. Subclavian vein cannulation has a relatively high
     risk of pneumothorax, so the internal jugular vein is usually preferable, via
     a ‘high’ approach. When possible, use ultrasound (USS) guidance and the
     right side of the neck (d risk of thoracic duct damage). If, however, a chest
     drain is already in situ, use the same side for central venous cannulation.
     The femoral vein is useful for temporary access in severe trauma, burns,
     and in drug addicts with many thrombosed veins.
     Seldinger technique for central venous access
     The method of choice, because the relatively ﬁne needle d risk of
     complications such as pneumothorax. The technique involves inserting
     a hollow metal needle into the vein. A ﬂexible guidewire is threaded
     through the needle, which is then removed. A tapered dilator and plastic
     cannula are inserted over the guidewire and advanced into the vein. The
     guidewire and dilator are removed, and the cannula secured. Once the
     cannula is in place, check that venous blood can be freely aspirated and
     secure the cannula.
     Precautions and problems
     Central venous access is a specialized technique with potentially life-
     threatening complications, including: pneumothorax, haemothorax, arterial
     puncture, thoracic duct damage, air embolism, and infection.
     • Expert supervision is essential. Cannulation is particularly difﬁcult
       and hazardous in hypovolaemic, shocked, or agitated patients. In such
       situations, consider whether it is possible to defer the procedure.
     • USS has become widely available and is increasingly used by suitably
       trained ED specialists. It d complications and failure rates by clarifying
       the relative positions of needle, vein, and surrounding structures.
       Variant anatomy and vein patency can also be assessed by USS.
     • Bleeding dyscrasias and anticoagulant treatment are contraindications
       to internal jugular and subclavian vein access.
     • Severe pulmonary disease is a relative contraindication to central venous
       access, especially by the subclavian route, because a pneumothorax
       would be particularly dangerous.
                                              CENTRAL VENOUS ACCESS               57

Methods
Use aseptic technique. If possible, tilt the trolley 10° head down to ﬁll
the internal jugular and subclavian veins and d risk of air embolus. After
successful or attempted subclavian or internal jugular cannulation, take a
chest X-ray (CXR) to check for pneumothorax and the position of the
cannula.
External jugular vein
The vein can be seen and felt as it crosses superﬁcially over the
sternomastoid muscle and runs obliquely towards the clavicle. Gentle
pressure on the lower end of the vein will distend it. A standard IV cannula
can easily be inserted into the external jugular vein, but passing a catheter
centrally may be difﬁcult because of valves and the angle at which the vein
joins the subclavian vein.
Internal jugular vein
The internal jugular vein runs antero-laterally in the carotid sheath, parallel
to the carotid artery, and deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The
high approach described has less risk of pneumothorax than lower
approaches (Fig. 2.7).
• Turn the patient’s head away from the side to be cannulated.
• Identify the carotid pulse at the level of the thyroid cartilage.
• Insert the needle 0.5cm lateral to the artery, at the medial border of
  sternomastoid muscle.
• Advance the needle at an angle of 45° parallel to the sagittal plane,
  pointing towards the ipsilateral nipple. The vein should be entered at a
  depth of 2–4cm and blood aspirated freely. If it is not, try again slightly
  more laterally.
Subclavian vein (infraclavicular approach)
• Turn the patient’s head away from the side of cannulation.
• Identify the mid-clavicular point and the sternal notch.
• Insert the needle 1cm below the mid-clavicular point and advance it
  horizontally below and behind the clavicle, aiming at a ﬁnger in the
  suprasternal notch. The vein is usually entered at a depth of 4–6cm
  (Fig. 2.8).
Femoral vein
Insert the needle 81cm medial to the femoral artery and just below the
inguinal ligament, pointing slightly medially and with the needle at 20–30°
to the skin.
58    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

                                       Sternomastoid
                                           muscle

                                                                        Carotid artery

     Fig. 2.7 Internal jugular cannulation.1

                   Subclavian vein

                         Clavicle
                                                                           Finger in
                                                                           suprasternal
                                                                           notch

                                First rib

                                                 Superior vena cava
     Fig. 2.8   Subclavian vein cannulation.2

     1 Rosen M et al. Handbook of Percutaneous Central Venous Catheterization. W.B. Saunders,
       London.
     2 Cosgriff JH. An Atlas of Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedures for Emergency Personnel.
       J.B. Lippincott, Philadelphia.
                                    SEVERE SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK             59

Severe sepsis and septic shock
Septic patients have a systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
as a consequence of infection. Severe sepsis refers to septic patients with
evidence of organ hypoperfusion. Septic shock is present when septic
patients exhibit hypotension unresponsive to intravenous ﬂuid resuscitation.
Systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome
This requires 2 or more of:
• Body temperature of >38°C or <36°C
• Heart rate >90/min
• Respiratory rate >20 breaths/min or PaCO2 < 4.3kPa
• WCC >12 × 109/L or <4 × 109/L or >10% immature (band) forms
Management
Severely septic patients have SIRS with evidence of hypoperfusion (eg
systolic BP <90mmHg and/or lactate >3mmol/L). Obtain senior/ICU help
early. Intensive therapy of severely septic patients focuses upon certain
therapeutic goals:
• CVP of 8–12mmHg.
• mean arterial pressure >65mmHg.
• urine output >0.5mL/kg/hr.
• central venous saturation >65%.
Adopt the following approach:
• Obtain senior/ICU assistance now.
• Assess and manage airway, breathing, circulation (ABC)—in particular,
  provide high ﬂow oxygen, secure good IV access and give an initial IV
  ﬂuid bolus of 20mL/kg of 0.9% saline. Some patients may require early
  tracheal intubation and IPPV.
• Look for obvious sources of infection.
• Check BMG (and treat if hypoglycaemic).
• Take blood cultures before starting antibiotics (the choice of antibiotics
  will depend upon the likely cause and is considered on b p.60).
• Patients who remain hypotensive and/or have a lactate >3mmol/L
  require central venous and arterial catheterization in an intensive care/
  resuscitation setting, with IVI noradrenaline to maintain mean arterial
  pressure >65mmHg and IV 0.9% saline 500mL boluses every 20mins
  to achieve CVP 8–12mmHg (12–15mmHg in mechanically ventilated
  patients).
60    CHAPTER 2 Life-threatening emergencies

     Shock
     Shock is a clinical condition characterized by failure to adequately perfuse
     and oxygenate vital organs. Clinically, shock is recognized by:
     • Hypotension Generally considered to be systolic BP <90mmHg (in
       adults), but values may be higher in young, ﬁt or previously hypertensive
       patients. Associated tachycardia (>100/min) is common, but may not be
       present in patients with cardiac or neurological causes or in those taking
       B-blockers. A few patients with haemorrhagic shock have a paradoxical
       bradycardia.
     • Altered consciousness and/or fainting (especially on standing or sitting
       up) may result from d cerebral perfusion.
     • Poor peripheral perfusion Cool peripheries, clammy/sweaty skin, pallor,
       d capillary return, but note that in the early phase of endotoxic septic
       shock there may be vasodilatation with warm peripheries.
     • Oliguria d renal perfusion with urine output <50mL/hr (in adults).
     • Tachypnoea.
     Classiﬁcation of shock
     Traditional classiﬁcation of types of shock is artiﬁcial—mixed aetiologies
     are common.
     Hypovolaemic shock
     • Blood loss: trauma, gastrointestinal (GI) bleed (haematemesis, melaena),
       ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
     • Fluid loss/redistribution (‘third spacing’): burns, GI losses (vomiting,
       diarrhoea), pancreatitis, sepsis.
     Cardiogenic shock
     • Primary: myocardial infarction (MI), arrhythmias, valve dysfunction,
       myocarditis.
     • Secondary: cardiac tamponade, massive pulmonary embolus, tension
       pneumothorax.
     Septic shock (see b p.59)
     More common at the extremes of age, in patients with diabetes mellitus,
     renal/hepatic failure and the immunocompromised (eg HIV infection,
     underlying malignancy, post-splenectomy, steroid therapy). Note that
     fever, rigors and i white cell count (WCC) may not be present.
     • Organisms responsible include Gram +ve and –ve, especially Staph. aureus,
       Strep. pneumoniae, N meningitidis, coliforms including enterococci and
       Bacteroides (especially in patients with intra-abdominal emergencies,
       such as ruptured diverticular abscess). In the immunocompromised,
       Pseudomonas, viruses, and fungi may cause septic shock.
     Anaphylactic shock: see b p.42.
     Neurogenic shock: see b p.382.
     Other causes
     These include poisoning (b p.183) and Addison’s disease (b p.155).
                                                                     SHOCK        61

Management of shock
Investigation and treatment should occur simultaneously. Get senior help
immediately.
• Address the priorities—ABC.
• Give high ﬂow O2 by mask.
• Secure adequate venous access and take blood for FBC, U&E, glucose,
  liver function tests (LFTs), lactate, coagulation screen, and if appropriate,
  blood cultures.
• Monitor vital signs, including pulse, BP, SpO2, respiratory rate.
• Check ABG.
• Monitor ECG and obtain 12 lead ECG and CXR.
• Insert a urinary catheter and monitor urine output hourly.
• For shock associated with d effective circulating blood volume, give
  IV crystalloid (0.9% saline) 20mL/kg as bolus. Give further IV ﬂuids
  including colloid 9 blood (aim for haematocrit (Hct) >30%) according
  to aetiology and clinical response (and in particular, pulse, BP, central
  venous pressure (CVP), and urine output). Use caution with IV ﬂuid
  infusion in shock related to cardiogenic causes, and in ruptured or
  dissecting aortic aneurysm.
• Look for, and treat speciﬁcally, the cause(s) of the shock. Echocardiography,
  USS, CT, and/or surgical intervention may be required. Speciﬁc treatments
  include:
    • Laparotomy: ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, splenic and/or
      liver trauma, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, intra-abdominal sepsis.
    • Thrombolysis/angioplasty: MI.
    • Thrombolysis: PE.
    • Pericardiocentesis/cardiac surgery: cardiac tamponade, aortic valve
      dysfunction.
    • Antidotes: for certain poisons.
    • Antibiotics: sepsis. The choice of antibiotic will depend upon the
      perceived cause and local policies (eg ceftriaxone for meningococcal
      disease). Where there is no obvious source, empirical combination
      therapy is advised (eg co-amoxiclav + gentamicin + metronidazole).
      Obtain specialist microbiological advice early, especially in
      neutropaenic/immunocompromised patients.
• Inotropic and vasoactive therapy, assisted ventilation, and invasive
  monitoring (including arterial and CVP lines) are often needed as part
  of goal directed therapy. Get specialist ICU help early.
62    Chapter 3
              00

     Medicine

     Electrocardiogram interpretation                    64
     Chest pain                                          66
     Angina                                              67
     Acute coronary syndromes                            68
     ST segment elevation MI                             70
     Myocardial infarction: electrocardiogram changes    72
     STEMI: treatment                                    76
     Pericarditis                                        78
     Bradyarrhythmias                                    80
     Treatment of bradyarrhythmias                       82
     Tachycardia algorithm–with pulse                    84
     Tachyarrhythmias                                    86
     Broad complex tachyarrhythmias                      87
     Narrow complex tachyarrhythmias                     88
     Atrial ﬁbrillation                                  89
     Hypertensive problems                               90
     Aortic dissection                                   92
     Haemoptysis                                         94
     Oxygen                                              95
     The dyspnoeic patient                               96
     Hyperventilation                                    97
     Arterial blood gases                                98
     Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema                       100
     Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema                   102
     Pleural effusion                                   103
     Acute asthma: assessment                           104
     Acute asthma: management                           106
     COPD                                               108
     Pneumonia                                          110
     Pulmonary aspiration                               112
 Chapter 3                                 63

Medicine

Spontaneous pneumothorax             114
Deep venous thrombosis               118
Pulmonary embolism                   120
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding      122
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding      124
Headache                             126
Subarachnoid haemorrhage             128
Migraine                             130
Other causes of headache             132
Acute confusional state (delirium)   134
Dementia                             135
The unconscious patient              136
Collapse and syncope                 140
Acute generalized weakness           142
Stroke                               144
Transient ischaemic attacks          146
Seizures and status epilepticus      148
Hypoglycaemia                        150
Hyperglycaemic crises                152
Sodium derangements                  154
Addisonian crisis                    155
Thyrotoxic crisis                    156
Urinary tract infection              158
Chronic renal failure                160
Hyperkalaemia                        162
Hypokalaemia                         164
Porphyria                            165
Bleeding disorders                   166
Patients on anticoagulants           170
Blood transfusion                    172
Sickle cell disease                  176
64    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Electrocardiogram interpretation
     The electrocardiogram (ECG) is normally recorded so that a deﬂection
     of 10mm = 1mV. The recording rate is 25mm/sec, 1mm = 0.04sec, 1 large
     square = 0.2sec. There is an ECG ruler on the inside back cover. Follow a
     systematic approach.
     Rate Calculate the rate by dividing 300 by the number of large squares in
     one R–R interval.
     Frontal plane axis Normally lies between –30* and +90* (see Fig. 3.1).
     With a normal axis, QRS complexes in I and II are both +ve. An axis
     more –ve than –30* (I +ve, aVF and II –ve) is left axis deviation (causes:
     left anterior hemiblock, inferior myocardial infarction (MI), ventricular
     tachycardia (VT), Wolf Parkinson White (WPW) syndrome). An axis more
     +ve than +90* (I –ve, aVF +ve) is right axis deviation (causes: pulmonary
     embolism (PE), cor pulmonale, lateral MI, left posterior hemiblock).
     P wave Normally <0.12sec wide and <2.5mm tall. They are best seen in
     leads II and V1 which are chosen for rhythm strips or monitoring. A tall
     peaked P wave in II may reﬂect right atrial hypertrophy; a widened biﬁd P
     wave left atrial hypertrophy. P waves are absent in atrial ﬁbrillation (AF).
     PR interval Normally 0.12–0.2sec (<5 small squares). A short PR interval
     (abnormally fast conduction between atria and ventricles) implies an
     accessory pathway (eg Wolf Parkinson White syndrome).
     A prolonged PR interval occurs in heart block (ﬁrst, second or third
     degree, see b Bradyarrhythmias, p.80).
     QRS width Normally 0.05–0.11sec (<3 small squares). Prolonged QRS
     complexes may be due to: right bundle branch block (RBBB) (RsR' or
     M shape in V1), left bundle branch block (LBBB) (QS or W shape
     in V1 with RsR' or M shape in V6), tricyclic antidepressant poisoning
     (b p.194), hypothermia, ventricular rhythms, and ectopics.

                                           Head
                                           –90°
                          aVR–150°
                                                       aVL–30°
                  Right     ±180°                      I 0°      Left

                             +120° III            II +60°
                                           aVF
                                           +90°
                                           Feet
     Fig. 3.1 Diagram of the ECG frontal axis.
                                 ELECTROCARDIOGRAM INTERPRETATION           65

QRS amplitude The QRS amplitude can indicate left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH). Signs of LVH are: (S in V2 + R in V5) > 35mm; R in I >
15mm; R in aVL > 11mm.
Q waves May be normal in III, aVR, and V1, but are abnormal in other
leads if >0.04sec or > ½ of the height of the subsequent R wave.
ST segment elevation is caused by: acute MI, pericarditis (concave up),
ventricular aneurysm, Prinzmetal’s angina, LVH, Brugada syndrome,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, benign early repolarization.
ST segment depression is caused by: ischaemia, digoxin, LVH with strain.
QT interval = start of Q wave to end of T wave.
QTc = QT⁄√R–R (Bazett’s formula). Normal QTc is <440msec.
At rates of 60–100/min, QT should be <1/2 R–R interval.
A prolonged QTc predisposes to ‘torsades de pointes’ (b Broad
complex tachyarrhythmias, p.87) and is caused by acute MI, hypothermia,
hypocalcaemia, drugs (quinidine, tricyclic antidepressants), certain
congenital diseases (eg Romano–Ward syndrome).
T waves Abnormal if inverted in V4–6. Peaked T waves are seen in early
acute MI and hyperkalaemia (b p.162). Flattened T waves (sometimes with
prominent U waves) occur in hypokalaemia.

                                 R
            1.0
                    PR segment          ST segment

    10 mm                                       T
            0.5
                           P                                           P
                                                           U

              0
    1 mm
                   P–R interval Q S                      Isoelectric line

                                 QRS interval
    Voltage
     (mV)                            Q–T interval

            0.04     0.0       0.2         0.4     0.6          0.8
                                           Seconds
Fig. 3.2
66    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Chest pain
     Always take chest pain seriously. It may reﬂect life-threatening illness.
     Triage patients with chest pain as ‘urgent’ and ensure that they are seen
     within a few minutes. Ischaemic heart disease is understandably the ﬁrst
     diagnosis to spring to mind in the middle-aged or elderly, but chest pain
     may have a variety of other disease processes, many of which are also
     potentially life-threatening (Table 3.1).

      Table 3.1 The differential diagnosis of chest pain
      Common causes                                Less common causes
      Musculoskeletal (eg costochondritis)         Aortic dissection*
      Acute coronary syndrome*                     Cholecystitis
      Pneumothorax*                                Herpes zoster
      Oesophagitis                                 Oesophageal rupture*
      Pneumonia                                    Pancreatitis*
      Pulmonary embolism*                          Vertebral collapse
      Obscure origin (eg precordial catch)         Tabes dorsalis (very rare)
      *Potentially rapidly fatal.

     Reaching the correct conclusion requires accurate interpretation of the
     history, examination and investigations, bearing in mind recognized patterns
     of disease presentations.
     History
     Characterize the pain
     • Site (eg central, bilateral or unilateral).
     • Severity.
     • Time of onset and duration.
     • Character (eg ‘stabbing’, ‘tight/gripping’, or ‘dull/aching’).
     • Radiation (eg to arms and neck in myocardial ischaemia).
     • Precipitating and relieving factors (eg exercise/rest/GTN spray).
     • Previous similar pains.
     Enquire about associated symptoms Breathlessness, nausea, and vomiting,
     sweating, cough, haemoptysis, palpitations, dizziness, loss of consciousness.
     Document past history, drug history, and allergies. Old notes and old
     ECGs are invaluable—request them at an early stage.
     Quickly consider contacting cardiologists if acute coronary syndrome
     (ACS) is likely (b ST segment elevation MI: treatment, p.76).
     Examination and resuscitation
     Evaluate Airway, Breathing, Circulation (ABC) and resuscitate (O2, venous access,
     IV analgesia) as appropriate. Listen to both lung ﬁelds and check for tension pneu-
     mothorax and severe left ventricular failure (LVF). Complete full examination.
     Investigations
     These depend upon the presentation and likely diagnosis, but an ECG and
     CXR are usually required. Remember that these may initially be normal
     in MI, PE and aortic dissection. Ensure that all patients receive ECG moni-
     toring in an area where a deﬁbrillator is readily available.
                                                                    ANGINA         67

Angina
Angina is deﬁned as discomfort in the chest, arm, neck, or adjacent areas
due to myocardial ischaemia. It can be brought on by exertion, cold weather
and emotion. It occurs when coronary artery blood ﬂow fails to meet the
O2 demand of the myocardium (eg during exercise, coronary artery spasm
or anaemia). Ischaemia may produce ST depression or inversion, which
resolves on recovery.
First presentation of angina
Patients may come to the ED with angina as a ﬁrst presentation of
ischaemic heart disease (IHD). Always consider the possibility of MI. In
particular, suspect myocardial cell death with any pain lasting >10min (even
if relieved by glyceryl trinitrate (GTN)). A normal examination, normal ECG
and normal baseline cardiac markers do not exclude MI. If in any doubt, admit
the patient. If considering discharge, discuss with senior ED/medical staff.
Atypical cardiac chest pain
Patients with acute MI are occasionally sent home from the ED
inadvertently. Cardiac chest pain may be poorly localized, and may present
with musculoskeletal features or gastrointestinal (GI) upset. In particular,
patients with acute coronary syndromes commonly have chest wall
tenderness. Some patients understandably play down symptoms in order
to avoid admission to hospital. If the clinical history is suspicious of cardiac
pain (especially in a patient with risk factors, such as family history of IHD,
hypertension, smoking), then refer for admission. Do not be fooled by a
normal ECG, normal examination, or the fact that the patient is <30 years
old. Remember that oesophageal pain may improve with GTN and true
cardiac pain may appear to improve with antacids. The decision whether
or not to refer the patient for admission and investigation depends upon
an assessment of the risk of MI. In general, exclude an MI where chest pain
lasting >15min has some features of IHD. Also refer patients who look
unwell, even if the chest pain lasts <15min.
68    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Acute coronary syndromes
     Coronary artery plaque rupture can result in a variety of ischaemic
     conditions which fall under the overall term of ‘acute coronary syndrome’
     and include unstable angina, non-ST segment elevation MI (NSTEMI)
     and ST segment elevation MI (STEMI). Patients labelled as having acute
     coronary syndrome, but without initial ST elevation, comprise a relatively
     heterogenous group—some later proving (on the basis of elevated blood
     troponin levels) to have suffered an NSTEMI.
     The patient presenting with unstable angina or NSTEMI
     Unstable angina can occur as worsening angina or a single episode of
     ‘crescendo’ angina, with a high risk of infarction. Features include angina
     at rest, i frequency, i duration, and severity of pain (including response
     to GTN). It may be difﬁcult to distinguish between unstable angina and
     NSTEMI in the ED.
     • Provide O2 to maintain SpO2 94–98% and attach cardiac monitor.
     • Administer IV opioid analgesia (± antiemetic) as required.
     • Give aspirin 300mg PO and clopidogrel 300mg PO.
     • Start low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), eg dalteparin 120units/
        kg SC every 12hr (max 10,000U) or enoxaparin 1mg/kg SC every 12hr.
        Synthetic pentasaccharide fondaparinux 2.5mg SC may be used instead.
        Follow local guidelines.
     • If pain is unrelieved, commence GTN intravenous infusion (IVI; start at
        0.6mg/hr and i as necessary), provided systolic BP is >90mmHg.
     • Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (eg eptiﬁbatide and tiroﬁban) are going
        out of favour for patients at risk of NSTEMI or high TIMI risk score (see
        Table 3.2).
     • If high risk of NSTEMI, haemodynamically stable and no contraindications,
        consider atenolol (5mg IV slowly over 5mins repeated once after 15mins),
        according to local policy. Contraindications include: hypotension,
        bradycardia, second or third degree heart block, heart failure and severe
        reactive airways disease.
     • Refer for admission, repeat ECGs and blood troponin testing 12hr after
        pain onset.
     • Discuss with cardiology all patients at high risk of NSTEMI or with TIMI
        score >3. They may beneﬁt from early revascularization procedures.
                                            ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES             69

 Table 3.2 TIMI risk score: increasing score predicts mortality or
 adverse event
 Risk factor                                                            Points
 Age >65                                                                1
 3+ risk factors for coronary artery disease                            1
 Family history of IHD, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes,
 or smoker
 Known coronary artery disease with stenosis ≥50%                       1
 Aspirin use in last 7 days                                             1
 Recent episode of angina prior to this event                           1
 Raised troponin levels (or other cardiac marker)                       1
 ST segment deviation ≥0.5mm on ECG                                     1

Normal lead II (Fig. 3.3)
                                        R

                                    P            T

                                        S   ST

Fig. 3.3

Ischaemic changes in lead II (Fig. 3.4)
                                        R

                                P                T

                                        S   ST

Fig. 3.4

Prinzmetal’s or ‘variant’ angina
Angina associated with ST elevation may be due to coronary artery vasos-
pasm. This may occur with or without a ﬁxed coronary abnormality and
may be indistinguishable from an acute MI until changes resolve rapidly
with GTN as pain is relieved.
70    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     ST segment elevation MI
     IHD is the leading cause of death in the Western world. Mortality from
     acute MI is believed to be 45%, with 70% of these deaths occurring before
     reaching medical care. Contributory risk factors for MI include smoking,
     hypertension, age, male sex, diabetes, hyperlipidaemia, and family history.
     MI pathology
     MI mostly affects the left ventricle. It usually results from sudden occlusion
     of a coronary artery or one of its branches by thrombosis over a pre-
     existing atheromatous plaque. Patients with IHD are at risk of sustaining
     an MI if additional stresses are placed upon their already critically impaired
     myocardial circulation (eg a high level of carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb)
     following smoke inhalation). MI may also occur in vasculitic processes,
     eg cranial arteritis (b p.132) and Kawasaki disease.
     MI diagnosis
     The diagnosis of acute MI requires 2 out of the following 3 features:
     • A history of cardiac-type ischaemic chest pain.
     • Evolutionary changes on serial ECGs.
     • A rise in serum cardiac markers.
     Note that 50–60% of patients will not have a diagnostic ECG on arrival
     and up to 17% will have an entirely normal initial ECG. Late presentation
     does not improve diagnostic accuracy of the ECG.
     History
     The classic presentation is of sudden onset, severe, constant central
     chest pain, which radiates to the arms, neck, or jaw. This may be similar
     to previous angina pectoris, but is much more severe and unrelieved
     by GTN. The pain is usually accompanied by one or more associated
     symptoms: sweating, nausea, vomiting, breathlessness.
     Atypical presentation is common. Have a high level of suspicion. Many
     patients describe atypical pain, some attributing it to indigestion (be wary
     of new onset ‘dyspeptic’ pain). Up to a third of patients with acute MI
     do not report any chest pain. These patients tend to be older, are more
     likely to be female, have a history of diabetes or heart failure, and have a
     higher mortality.
     These patients may present with:
     • LVF.
     • Collapse or syncope (often with associated injuries eg head injury).
     • Confusion.
     • Stroke.
     • An incidental ECG ﬁnding at a later date.
     In a patient who presents with possible MI, enquire about past
     medical history (IHD, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidaemia) and
     contraindications to thrombolysis. Ask about drug history, including drugs
     of abuse (particularly cocaine b p.215).
                                           ST SEGMENT ELEVATION MI            71

Examination
Examination and initial resuscitation (maintain SpO2 in normal range, IV
cannula, analgesia) go hand in hand. The patient may be pale, sweaty, and
distressed. Examination is usually normal unless complications have super-
vened (eg arrhythmias, LVF). Direct initial examination towards searching
for these complications and excluding alternative diagnoses:
• Check pulse, BP and monitor trace (?arrhythmia or cardiogenic shock).
• Listen to the heart (?murmurs or 3rd heart sound).
• Listen to the lung ﬁelds (?LVF, pneumonia, pneumothorax).
• Check peripheral pulses (?aortic dissection).
• Check legs for evidence of deep vein thrombosis (?PE).
• Palpate for abdominal tenderness or masses (?cholecystitis, pancreatitis,
   perforated peptic ulcer, ruptured aortic aneurysm).
Investigations
The diagnosis of ST segment elevation myocardial infarction within the
ﬁrst few hours is based upon history and ECG changes (serum cardiac
markers may take several hours to rise—see below).
• Record an ECG as soon as possible, ideally within a few minutes of
  arrival at hospital. Sometimes patients arrive at hospital with ECGs of
  diagnostic quality already recorded by paramedics. If the initial ECG is
  normal, but symptoms are suspicious, repeat the ECG every 15min and
  re-evaluate.
• Request old notes (these may contain previous ECGs for comparison).
• Ensure continuous cardiac monitoring and pulse oximetry.
• Monitor BP and respiratory rate.
• Obtain venous access and send blood for cardiac markers, U&E, glucose,
  FBC, lipids.
• Obtain a CXR if there is suspicion of LVF or aortic dissection.
Cardiac markers
Troponins are now universally used. Troponin T (cTnT) and Troponin
I (cTnI) are proteins virtually exclusive to cardiac myocytes. They are
highly speciﬁc and sensitive, but are only maximally accurate after 12hr.
Troponin T and I cannot be used to rule out MI in the ﬁrst few hours. In
addition, cardiac cells may release troponin into the blood when cardiac
muscle is damaged by pericarditis, pulmonary embolism with a large clot
burden, or sepsis. Renal failure reduces excretion of troponin.
Chest pain assessment units
These units are becoming established in some EDs. A combination of
ECGs, ST segment monitoring, cardiac markers, and exercise testing is
used to allow discharge of low to moderate risk patients within 6–12hr.
However, simply excluding an acute coronary syndrome is only part of
the assessment of chest pain.
72    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Myocardial infarction: ECG changes 1
     Infarction of cardiac muscle results in ECG changes that evolve over
     hours, days, and weeks in a relatively predictable fashion.
     Hyperacute changes
     Frequently ignored, although often subtle, some or all of the following
     may be observed within minutes of infarction:
     • i Ventricular activation time, since the infarcting myocardium is slower to
       conduct electrical impulses. The interval between the start of the QRS
       and apex of the R wave may be prolonged >0.045sec.
     • i Height of R wave may be seen initially in inferior leads in inferior MI.
     • Upward-sloping ST segment—having lost normal upward concavity, the
       ST segment straightens, then slopes upwards, before becoming ele-
       vated.
     • Tall, widened T waves.
     Evolving acute changes
     In isolation, none of these changes are speciﬁc to MI. In combination, and
     with an appropriate history, they can diagnose MI:
     • ST elevation: the most important ECG change. ST segments become
        concave down and are signiﬁcant if elevated >1mm in 2 limb leads, or
        >2mm in 2 adjacent chest leads.
     • Reciprocal ST depression may occur on the ‘opposite side’ of the heart.
     • Pathological Q waves (deﬁned on b p.65) reﬂect electrically inert
        necrotic myocardium. ECG leads over a large transmural infarct show
        deep QS waves. Leads directed towards the periphery of a large infarct
        or over a smaller infarct may show a QR complex or a loss of R wave
        amplitude.
     • T wave inversion: typically deeply inverted, symmetrical and pointed.
     • Conduction problems may develop. LBBB in a patient with acute cardiac
        chest pain makes interpretation of the ECG very difﬁcult. LBBB does not
        have to be new to be signiﬁcant. Do not delay intervention in patients
        with a good clinical history of MI in order to obtain old ECGs.
     Sgarbossa criteria for diagnosing ACS in the presence of LBBB
     • ST segment elevation >1mm in leads with positive QRS complexes.
     • ST segment depression in leads V1, V2, or V3.
     • ST segment elevation >5mm in lead with negative QRS complexes.
     If all 3 are present, MI is likely.
     Chronic changes
     In the months following an MI, ECG changes resolve to a variable extent.
     ST segments become isoelectric, unless a ventricular aneurysm develops.
     T waves gradually become +ve again. Q waves usually remain, indicating
     MI at some time in the past.
                              MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION: ECG CHANGES 1                           73

Electrocardiogram changes following myocardial infarction
(Fig. 3.5)

       Normal               Hours         Days            Weeks             Months
Fig. 3.5

Electrocardiograms after myocardial infarction (Figs 3.6 and 3.7)

                  I             aVR          V1                  V4

                 II             aVL           V2                   V5

                                                                       V6
           III                  aVF                V3

Fig. 3.6 Acute inferolateral infarction with ‘reciprocal’ ST changes in I, aVL, and V2–V3.

                                                   V1
                       I       aVR
                                                                      V4

                                                     V2               V5
                       II      aVL

                      III      aVF                 V3                 V6

Fig. 3.7 Acute anteroseptal infarction with minimal ‘reciprocal’ STchanges in III and aVF.
74    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Myocardial infarction: ECG changes 2
     Localization of myocardial infarction
     MI usually affects the left ventricle (LV), occasionally the right ventricle
     (RV), but virtually never the atria. The part of myocardium affected is
     implied by which leads show changes (Table 3.3).

      Table 3.3
      ECG leads                             Location of MI
      V1–3                                  Anteroseptal
      V5–6, aVL                             Anterolateral
      V2–4                                  Anterior
      V1–6                                  Extensive anterior
      I, II, aVL, V6                        Lateral
      II, III, aVF                          Inferior
      V1, V4R                               Right ventricle

     Posterior myocardial infarction
     Posterior MI nearly always occurs as part of inferior (postero-inferior) or
     lateral (postero-lateral) MI. No conventional electrode views the poste-
     rior heart, since intervening tissues result in an attenuated signal. ECG
     diagnosis of true posterior MI may be made from the use of V7–9 and from
     reciprocal changes seen in leads V1–3: tall, slightly widened R (reciprocal
     of Q), concave up ST depression (reciprocal of ST elevation), upright tall
     widened T (reciprocal of inverted T).
     Right ventricular infarct
     This occurs most often as part of an inferior MI. In the presence of
     changes of acute MI in the inferior leads, ST elevation in V1 suggests right
     ventricular involvement. In this case, record an ECG trace from lead V4R.
     The diagnosis of RV infarct helps determine treatment of ensuing cardiac
     failure. Treat RV failure with IV ﬂuids to maintain adequate ﬁlling pressure
     and exercise caution if considering use of nitrates.
     Blood supply to the heart and coronary artery dominance
     The left anterior descending artery supplies the anterior and septal cardiac
     areas (Fig. 3.9). The circumﬂex branch supplies the anterolateral aspect of
     the heart. The right coronary artery supplies the right ventricle. In most
     people the right coronary artery also supplies the sino-atrial node, the
     inferior wall of the left ventricle and the ventricular septum. In 15% of
     individuals, the inferior wall is supplied by the circumﬂex branch of the left
     coronary artery (left dominance).
                             MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION: ECG CHANGES 2                       75

    I             II              III               aVR             aVL          aVF

   V1            V2               V3                V4              V5           V6

Fig. 3.8 ECG of subendocardial infarct.

                Ascending aorta
                                                   Left main stem

                                                          Circumflex coronary
                                                                artery
           Right coronary
               artery                                               Diagonal branches
                                                                      (of the LAD)

                                                               Left anterior
                  Posterior                                  descending artery
              descending artery
                                        Septal branches
                                         (of the LAD)

Fig. 3.9
76    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     STEMI: treatment
     Speed is crucial—time is muscle. Ambulance control may alert the ED in
     advance of a patient with cardiac-type chest pain. Work efﬁciently as a
     team to ensure treatment is not delayed.
     • Give O2 to maintain SpO2 94–98% and attach cardiac monitor.
     • Obtain IV access and take samples for U&E, glucose, FBC, cardiac
       markers.
     • Provide small increments of IV opioid analgesia titrated to effect.
     • Ensure the patient has had 300mg aspirin and 300mg clopidogrel PO.
     • Contact cardiology for primary percutaneous coronary intervention
       (PCI). Arrange transport to the cath lab.
     • For patients undergoing PCI, consider IV glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor
       antagonist as an adjuvant. Be guided by local protocol.
     • If PCI is not available, consider thrombolysis and monitor carefully. Start
       LMWH, heparin, or fondaparinux, according to local protocols.
     • If pain continues, give IVI GTN (start at 0.6mg/hr and i as necessary),
       provided systolic BP is >90mmHg.
     • Consider atenolol (5mg slowly IV over 5min, repeated once after
       15min), or metoprolol, unless contraindicated (eg uncontrolled heart
       failure, hypotension, bradyarrhythmias, COPD).
     Indications for PCI or thrombolysis
     • ST elevation of >1mm in 2 limb leads, or
     • ST elevation of 2mm in 2 or more contiguous chest leads, or
     • LBBB in the presence of a typical history of acute MI (NB: LBBB does
       not have to be new).
     Primary angioplasty for ST segment elevation MI
     Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (coronary angioplasty and
     stenting) is the treatment of choice for STEMI. Compared with throm-
     bolysis, PCI administered within 12hr of symptom onset results in lower
     mortality and re-infarction rates. The sooner it is performed, the greater
     the beneﬁts.
     Thrombolysis
     If PCI cannot be performed within 90min of diagnosis, thrombolytic
     therapy is an alternative. The beneﬁts reduce markedly with time delay,
     so if PCI is not available, do not delay the administration of a thrombolytic
     agent. Rural areas with long hospital transfers may have a protocol for
     ambulance administered thrombolysis, aided by telemedicine advice from
     the ED or cardiology. Patients presenting >12hr after symptom onset will
     not beneﬁt from thrombolysis.
     Strokes, intracranial haemorrhage and major bleeds are more common
     in patients given thrombolysis. Intracranial bleeding is more common in
     older patients, those with hypertension on admission and those given tPA.
     Prior to administering thrombolysis, always explain the beneﬁts and risks
     to the patient. Obtain verbal consent to give the medication and record
     this in the notes.
                                                      STEMI: TREATMENT          77

Contraindications to thrombolysis
Most are relative, but discuss any contraindications with the patient and
cardiology:
• Head injury, recent stroke, previous neurosurgery or cerebral tumour.
• Recent GI or GU bleeding, menstruation, or coagulopathy/warfarin.
• Severe hypertension (eg systolic BP >200mmHg, diastolic BP>120mmHg),
  aortic dissection or pericarditis.
• Puncture of non-compressible vessel (eg subclavian vein), traumatic
  CPR, d GCS post-arrest.
• Major surgery within recent weeks.
• Pregnancy.
Choice of thrombolytic agents
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), rather than streptokinase, is the agent
of choice. Always use tPA if streptokinase was given >5 days ago or in
anterior MI in a patient <75 years old and <4hr of onset of symptoms, or
if hypotensive (systolic BP <90mmHg).
Alteplase (recombinant tPA (rtPA)) is most effective given by an
accelerated regimen, eg 15mg IV bolus, followed by 0.75mg/kg (max 50mg)
IVI for 30min, then 0.5mg/kg (max 35mg) IVI over 60min. Give LMWH (eg
enoxaparin 1mg/kg stat) or heparin concomitantly through a separate IV
line (5000unit IV bolus, then 1000units/hr IV), according to local protocols.
Reteplase (modiﬁed tPA) can be given as two IV boluses of 10units each
exactly 30min apart. Give LMWH/heparin as for alteplase.
Tenecteplase (modiﬁed tPA) is given as a single IV bolus over 10sec. Dose
according to weight (<60kg = 30mg; 60–69kg = 35mg; 70–79kg = 40mg;
80–89kg = 45mg; >90kg = 50mg). Give LMWH/heparin as for alteplase.
Streptokinase Given as 1.5mega-units by continuous IVI over 1hr. Strepto-
kinase is allergenic (may require slow IV chlorphenamine 10mg and IV
hydrocortisone 100mg) and frequently causes hypotension (d IVI rate
and tilt the bed head down—treatment rarely needs to be discontinued).
After a recent streptococcal infection, streptokinase may be ineffective
due to the antibodies produced.
Further management
Arrhythmias Occur commonly after MI. Occasional ventricular ectopics
or transient AF (lasting <30sec) require no treatment. Watch for sudden
VT/VF and treat as in b Cardiac arrest, p.46.
Hypokalaemia Treat if K+<4mmol/L.
Pulmonary oedema Treat as described on b p.101.
Cardiogenic shock d cardiac output with tissue hypoxia, which does not
improve with correction of intravascular volume. Mortality is 50–80%.
Contact ICU and cardiologist. Echocardiography may be required to
exclude conditions requiring urgent surgical repair (mitral regurgitation
from papillary muscle rupture, aortic dissection, ventricular septum rupture,
cardiac tamponade from ventricular wall rupture) or massive PE. If these
are excluded, emergency coronary intervention may i survival.
78    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Pericarditis
     Acute inﬂammation of the pericardium characteristically produces chest
     pain, low grade fever, and a pericardial friction rub. Pericarditis and
     myocarditis commonly co-exist.
     Causes
     • Myocardial infarction (including Dressler’s syndrome—see b p.79).
     • Viral (Coxsackie A9, B1-4, Echo 8, mumps, EBV, CMV, varicella, HIV,
       rubella, Parvo B19).
     • Bacterial (pneumococcus, meningococcus, Chlamydia, gonorrhoea,
       Haemophilus).
     • Tuberculosis (TB; especially in patients with HIV)—see b p.232.
     • Locally invasive carcinoma (eg bronchus or breast).
     • Rheumatic fever—see b Acute arthritis, p.497.
     • Uraemia.
     • Collagen vascular disease (SLE, polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid
       arthritis).
     • After cardiac surgery or radiotherapy.
     • Drugs (hydralazine, procainamide, methyldopa, minoxidil).
     Diagnosis
     Classical features of acute pericarditis are pericardial pain, a friction rub
     and concordant ST elevation on ECG. The characteristic combination of
     clinical presentation and ECG changes often results in a deﬁnite diagnosis.
     Chest pain is typically sharp, central, retrosternal, and worse on deep
     inspiration, change in position, exercise, and swallowing. A large pericardial
     effusion may cause dysphagia by compressing the oesophagus.
     A pericardial friction rub is often intermittent, positional, and elusive. It
     tends to be louder during inspiration, and may be heard in both systole
     and diastole. Low grade fever is common.
     Appropriate investigations include: ECG, chest X-ray, FBC, erythrocyte
     sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), U&E, and troponin.
     Obtain blood cultures if there is evidence of sepsis or suspicion of a
     bacterial cause (eg spread of intrathoracic infection). A pericardial effusion
     is most quickly and easily demonstrated by echocardiography or FAST
     scanning: clinical evidence of cardiac tamponade is rare.
     ECG changes
     In acute pericarditis ECG changes result from associated epicardial inﬂam-
     mation (see Fig. 3.10). Sinus tachycardia is usual, but AF, atrial ﬂutter or
     atrial ectopics may occur. ST elevation is concave up (unlike MI, b p.72),
     and present in at least 2 limb leads and all chest leads (most marked
     in V3–6). T waves are initially prominent, upright, and peaked, becoming
     ﬂattened or inverted over several days. PR depression (reﬂecting atrial
     inﬂammation) may occur in the same leads as ST elevation (this PR–ST
     discordance is characteristic). Pathological Q waves are not present.
     Pericardial effusion causes d QRS amplitude in all leads. Electrical alternans
     is diagnostic, but rare.
                                                               PERICARDITIS      79

Management
Refer to the medical team for echocardiography and treatment.
The appropriate treatment depends on the underlying cause.
Idiopathic pericarditis or viral pericarditis in young patients is usually
benign and self-limiting, responding to symptomatic treatment (high dose
NSAID ± PPI cover). Occasionally, it follows a relapsing course before
‘burning itself out’.
Dressler’s syndrome (autoimmune pericarditis ± effusion 2–14 weeks
after 3% of MIs) requires cardiology specialist care.
Pericardial effusion may occur with any type of pericarditis. It is relatively
common in acute bacterial, tuberculous, and malignant pericarditis.
Acute tamponade may occur following cardiac rupture with MI, aortic
dissection, or after cardiac surgery. Summon senior help and arrange
immediate echocardiography for patients with signs of tamponade, with
pericardiocentesis under ultrasound guidance, and then a deﬁnitive
drainage procedure. Emergency ‘blind’ pericardiocentesis is described on
b p.343.

      I              II           III        aVR         aVL         aVF

     V1            V2            V3         V4           V5           V6

Fig. 3.10 ECG of pericarditis.
80    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Bradyarrhythmias
     Bradycardia is a ventricular rate of <60/min in the adult. It usually reﬂects
     inﬂuences on or disease of the sino-atrial (SA) node, or atrioventricular
     (AV) block. Intraventricular conduction disturbances may progress to AV
     block. Sinus bradycardia may be physiological (eg athletes), due to drugs
     (B-blockers), or pathological (hypothyroidism, hypothermia, hypoxia, iICP,
     sick sinus syndrome, MI, myocardial ischaemia). Bradycardia also occurs in
     up to 1/3 of patients with hypovolaemia (eg GI bleed, ectopic pregnancy).
     Sick sinus syndrome (or ‘sinus node disease’) is usually the result of
     ischaemia or degeneration of SA node. It is characterized by sinus pauses
     (>2sec) or sinus arrest. Junctional or other escape beats may occur and
     occasionally a tachyarrhythmia may emerge (‘tachy-brady’ syndrome).
     Patients may present with dizziness, collapse, loss of consciousness or
     palpitations. A continuous 24hr ECG tape may demonstrate arrhythmias.
     AV block may be caused by IHD, drugs (eg excess digoxin) or cardiac
     surgery.
     First degree AV block Conduction from atria to ventricles occurs every
     time, but is delayed. The PR interval is >0.2sec (5 small squares on
     standard ECG) (Fig. 3.11).
     Second degree AV block Only a proportion of P waves are conducted to
     the ventricles. There are two types:
     • Mobitz type I block (Wenckebach): the PR interval becomes increasingly
       lengthened until a P wave fails to conduct (Fig. 3.12).
     • Mobitz type II block: failure to conduct P waves may occur regularly
       (eg 3:1) or irregularly, but the PR interval remains constant (Fig. 3.13).
     Third degree (complete) heart block Atrial activity is not conducted to
     ventricles. With a proximal block (eg at the AV node), a proximal escape
     pacemaker in the AV node or bundle of His may take over, producing
     narrow QRS complexes at a rate of 850/min. With distal AV block, a
     more distal escape pacemaker results in broad bizarre complexes at a
     rate of 830/min. Ventricular asystole may occur if the escape pacemaker
     stops discharging, unless a subsidiary pacemaker takes over (Fig. 3.14).
     Intraventricular conduction disturbances
     The intraventricular conducting system commences as the bundle of His
     and divides into right and left bundle branches—the latter subdivides
     further into antero-superior and postero-superior divisions. These two
     divisions and the right bundle branch are referred to as the ‘fascicles’.
     Blockage of 2 out of 3 fascicles = bifascicular block.
     • RBBB + left anterior hemiblock causes left axis deviation and RBBB
       pattern on ECG.
     • RBBB + left posterior hemiblock causes right axis deviation and RBBB
       pattern on ECG.
     Trifascicular block is present when bifasciular block is accompanied by
     a prolonged PR interval. Note that true blockage of all 3 fascicles would
     cause complete heart block, so ‘trifascicular block’ represents impending
     progression to complete heart block.
                                            BRADYARRHYTHMIAS   81

Fig. 3.11 ECG of ﬁrst degree heart block.

Fig. 3.12 ECG of Mobitz type I AV block.

Fig. 3.13 ECG of Mobitz type II AV block.

Fig. 3.14 ECG of complete AV block.
82    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Treatment of bradyarrhythmias
     The emergency treatment of bradycardia depends upon two important
     factors: the clinical condition of the patient and the risk of asystole. Give
     O2, insert an IV cannula and follow the 2010 European Resuscitation
     Council Guidelines shown opposite (www.resus.org.uk).
     Atropine is the ﬁrst-line drug. The standard dose is 500mcg IV, which may
     be repeated to a total of 3mg. Further doses are not effective and may
     result in toxic effects (eg psychosis, urinary retention).
     Adrenaline (epinephrine) can be used as a temporizing measure prior
     to transvenous pacing if an external pacemaker is not available. Give by
     controlled infusion at 2–10mcg/min, titrating up according to response
     (6mg adrenaline in 500mL 0.9% saline infused at 10–50mL/hr).
     External transcutaneous pacing is available on most deﬁbrillators. It
     allows a pacing current to be passed between 2 adhesive electrodes
     placed over the front of the chest and the back. Select external demand
     pacing mode at a rate of 70/min, then gradually i the pacing current from
     zero until capture is shown on the monitor. Clinically, capture results in
     a palpable peripheral pulse at the paced rate and clinical improvement in
     the patient’s condition. Provide small doses of IV opioid ± sedation if the
     patient ﬁnds external pacing very uncomfortable.
     Transvenous cardiac pacing is the treatment of choice for bradycardic
     patients who are at risk of asystole. The technique should only be
     performed by an experienced doctor. The preferred route of access is the
     internal jugular or subclavian vein. However, if thrombolysis has recently
     been given or is contemplated, or if the patient is taking anticoagulants,
     use the right femoral vein instead. Obtain a CXR to exclude complications.
     A correctly functioning ventricular pacemaker results in a pacing spike
     followed by a widened and bizarre QRS (Fig. 3.15).

     Fig. 3.15 Paced rhythm.

     Permanent pacemakers and implantable deﬁbrillators
     Increasingly sophisticated implantable devices are being used to manage
     arrhythmias. Occasionally, a patient will present to the ED with a
     malfunctioning pacemaker. Get urgent specialist advice. External trans-
     cutaneous pacing will provide temporary support whilst the problem is
     resolved. A special magnet may be needed to inactivate an implantable
     deﬁbrillator which ﬁres repeatedly.
                                       TREATMENT OF BRADYARRHYTHMIAS                 83

Algorithm for the management of bradycardia (Fig. 3.16)
See www.resus.org.uk

                     • Assess using the ABCDE approach
                     • Give oxygen if appropriate and obtain IV access
                     • Monitor ECG, BP, SpO2, record 12-lead ECG
                     • Identify and treat reversible causes
                       (e.g. electrolyte abnormalities)

                                    Adverse features?
                    YES        • Shock                               NO
                               • Syncope
                               • Myocardial ischaemia
                               • Heart failure

             Atropine
             500 mcg IV

           Satisfactory        YES
            response?

                   NO

        Interim measures:                                        Risk of asystole?
  • Atropine 500 mcg IV                                  • Recent asystole
    repeat to maximum of 3 mg                            • Mobitz II AV block
                                                YES
  • Isoprenaline 5 mcg min–1 IV                          • Complete heart block
  • Adrenaline 2–10 mcg min–1 IV                           with broad QRS
  • Alternative drugs*                                   • Ventricular pause >3s
  OR
  • Transcutaneous pacing                                                 NO

        Seek expert help        !                                     Observe
   Arrange transvenous pacing

  *Alternatives include:
  • Aminophylline
  • Dopamine
  • Glucagon (if beta-blocker or calcium channel blocker overdose)
  • Glycopyrronium bromide can be used instead of atropine

Fig. 3.16 Algorithm for the management of bradycardia.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 84

                                                                                                                                                              Tachycardia algorithm–with pulse
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER 3 Medicine
                                                       • Assess using the ABCDE approach
                                                       • Give oxygen if appropriate and obtain IV access
                                                       • Monitor ECG, BP, SpO2, record 12-lead ECG
                                                       • Identify and treat reversible causes (e.g. electrolyte abnormalities)

                                                                                Adverse features?
     Synchronised DC Shock                         Yes/Unstable          • Shock
           Up to 3 attempts                                              • Syncope
                                                                         • Myocardial ischaemia
                                                                         • Heart failure
• Amiodarone 300 mg IV over 10–20 min
  and repeat shock; followed by:                                                             No/Stable
 • Amiodarone 900 mg over 24 h
                                                         Broad                                                       Narrow
                                                                            Is QRS narrow (< 0.12s)?

                                 Broad QRS                                                                   Regular             Narrow QRS       Irregular
               Irregular                             Regular                                                                 Is rhythm regular?
                              Is rhythm regular?
                                                                               • Use vagal manoeuvres                   Irregular narrow complex
                                                                               • Adenosine 6 mg rapid IV bolus;                tachycardia
                                                                                 if unsuccessful give 12 mg;
                                                                                 if unsuccessful give further 12 mg   Probable atrial fibrillation
         Seek expert help                                                                                             Control rate with:
                                                                               • Monitor ECG continuously
                              !                                                                                       • β-Blocker or diltiazem
                                                                                                                      • Consider digoxin or amiodarone
                                                                                                                        if evidence of heart failure
                                                                                  Sinus rhythm restored?
  Possibilities include:                   If ventricular tachycardia
                                              (or uncertain rhythm):                                    No
  • AF with bundle branch block
     treat as for narrow complex           • Amiodarone 300 mg IV                                                             Seek expert help
                                                                                    Yes
  • Pre-excited AF                            over 20–60 min;                                                                                           !
    consider amiodarone                       then 900 mg over 24 h
  • Polymorphic VT                         If previously confirmed

                                                                                                                                                            TACHYCARDIA ALGORITHM
    (e.g. torsade de pointes -             SVT with bundle branch block:
    give magnesium 2 g over 10 min)                                          Probable re-entry paroxysmal SVT:
                                           • Give adenosine as for regular
                                             narrow complex tachycardia      • Record 12-lead ECG in sinus
                                                                               rhythm
                                                                             • If recurs, give adenosine again and    Possible atrial flutter
                                                                               consider choice of anti-arrhythmic     • Control rate (e.g. β-Blocker)
                                                                               prophylaxis

Fig. 3.17 Tachycardia algorithm with pulse (www.resus.org.uk).

                                                                                                                                                            85
86    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Tachyarrhythmias
     The single Resuscitation Council 2010 tachycardia algorithm (Fig. 3.17)
     (see www.resus.org.uk) is based on the fact that, irrespective of the exact
     underlying cardiac rhythm, many of the initial management principles in
     the peri-arrest setting are the same:
     • Rapidly assess ABC.
     • Monitor cardiac rhythm and record a 12-lead ECG.
     • Provide O2.
     • Identify and treat reversible causes.
     • Assess for evidence of instability (signs of shock, syncope, signs of heart
       failure, or myocardial ischaemia)—these indicate the need for urgent
       intervention, initially in the form of synchronized cardioversion.
     The unstable patient with tachyarrhythmia
     Synchronized cardioversion
     This requires two doctors—one to perform cardioversion, the other
     (experienced in anaesthesia) to provide sedation/anaesthesia and manage
     the airway. The patient will not be fasted and is therefore at particular risk
     of aspiration. The arrhythmia may d cardiac output and i circulation times,
     so IV drugs take much longer to work than usual. If the ‘sedation doctor’
     does not appreciate this and gives additional doses of anaesthetic drugs,
     hypotension and prolonged anaesthesia may result.
     Electrical cardioversion is synchronized to occur with the R wave to
     minimize the risk of inducing VF. Synchronized cardioversion is effective
     in treating patients who exhibit evidence of instability with underlying
     rhythms of SVT, atrial ﬂutter, atrial ﬁbrillation, and VT—choose an initial
     level of energy according to the rhythm:
     • For broad complex tachycardia or AF, start with 200J monophasic or
       120–150J biphasic. If unsuccessful, i in increments to 360J monophasic
       or 150J biphasic.
     • Start with a lower energy for atrial ﬂutter and paroxysmal SVT—use
       100J monophasic or 70–120J biphasic. If this is unsuccessful, increase in
       increments to 360J monophasic or 150J biphasic.
     Amiodarone
     If cardioversion is unsuccessful after 3 synchronized shocks, give amio-
     darone 300mg IV over 10–20min and repeat shock. Give amiodarone
     by central vein when possible as it causes thrombophlebitis when given
     peripherally. However, in an emergency, it can be given into a large
     peripheral vein.
                            BROAD COMPLEX TACHYARRHYTHMIAS                  87

Broad complex tachyarrhythmias
May be caused by VT, or rarely by SVT with aberrant conduction. The
default position should be that broad complex tachycardia is VT. Provide
O2 as appropriate, insert an IV cannula and follow the Resuscitation
Council guidelines (Fig. 3.17) and (www.resus.org.uk).
The priorities in broad complex arrhythmias associated with tricyclic
overdose are airway management, oxygenation, ventilation and correction
of metabolic disorders: give IV bicarbonate, but avoid anti-arrhythmic
drugs (b Tricyclic antidepressant poisoning, p.194).

Fig. 3.18
Evaluating ECGs: is it VT or SVT with aberrant conduction?
VT is much more likely as a cause of the broad complex tachycardia if:
• The patient is >60 years.
• The patient has a history of IHD or cardiomyopathy.
• There is clinical evidence of AV dissociation (intermittent cannon ‘a’
  waves seen on jugular venous pressure (JVP), ﬁrst heart sound of vari-
  able intensity).
• Inverted P waves in lead II.
• The frontal plane axis is bizarre (–90° to –180°).
• The QRS is >0.13sec.
• There are ‘capture’ or ‘fusion’ beats.
• The QRS is bizarre, not resembling a bundle branch block pattern
• All chest leads (V1–6) are concordant (QRS complexes point the same
  way).
• R>R´ (or r´) in V1.
• There is a deep S wave (either QS, rS or RS) in V6.
Torsades de pointes
This is a rare form of polymorphic VT, associated with hypomagnesaemia,
hypokalaemia, long QT interval (congenital or drug related, eg sotalol,
antipsychotics, antihistamines, antidepressants). A constantly changing
electrical axis results in QRS complexes of undulating amplitude. Usually
paroxysmal, it may degenerate to VF. Get expert help and treat with IV
magnesium sulphate (2g over 10min = 8mmol or 4mL 50% magnesium).
Refractory cases may require overdrive pacing.

Fig. 3.19
88    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Narrow complex tachyarrhythmias
     These are almost always of supraventricular origin. Underlying rhythms
     include:
     • Sinus tachycardia.
     • Paroxysmal AV re-entrant tachycardia (often referred to as ‘SVT’).
     • AF with fast ventricular response.
     • Atrial ﬂutter.
     • Atrial tachycardia.
     • Junctional tachycardia.
     Give O2, insert an IV cannula, and follow the algorithm in Fig. 3.17 (www.
     resus.org.uk). Determine if the rhythm is regular. Treat irregular rhythms
     (AF) as outlined in Fig. 3.17. If the ventricular rate is exactly 150/min, atrial
     ﬂutter with 2:1 block is likely (Fig. 3.20).
     The compromised patient with shock, syncope, acute cardiac failure, or
     cardiac ischaemia should be treated with emergency electrical cardioversion.
     It is reasonable to give IV adenosine while arranging the cardioversion, as
     long as this does not delay the procedure.
     For stable patients consider
     Vagal stimulation The most effective way is a Valsalva manoeuvre while
     supine or tilted head down. Instruct the patient to attempt to blow the
     plunger out of a 50mL bladder tip syringe. If unsuccessful, in the young
     patient, massage the carotid sinus for 15sec (1 side only), by gently
     rubbing in a circular action lateral to the upper border of the thyroid
     cartilage. Carotid sinus massage may be dangerous (especially if there is a
     carotid bruit or previous stroke/TIA).
     Adenosine This temporarily blocks conduction through the AV node. It
     has a very short half-life (10–15sec). Adenosine can successfully terminate
     re-entrant tachycardias and may ‘unmask’ other conditions (eg atrial
     ﬂutter) by temporarily producing a conduction block. It is contraindicated
     in 2* or 3* AV block, patients with WPW and asthmatics. The effects
     are blocked by theophylline and potentiated markedly (and dangerously)
     in the presence of dipyridamole, carbamazepine or in a denervated
     heart—seek advice. Warn the patient about transient ﬂushing and chest
     discomfort. Give adenosine by fast bolus 6mg IV injection into an IV
     cannula in the antecubital fossa and ﬂush with 0.9% saline (Fig. 3.17) while
     recording a rhythm strip. If unsuccessful, repeat with 12mg, then 12mg.
     If adenosine is contra-indicated, consider IV verapamil 2.5–5mg over 2min.
     Avoid verapamil in patients with cardiac failure, hypotension, concomitant
     B-blocker therapy, or WPW.

     Fig. 3.20 Narrow complex tachycardia.
                                                   ATRIAL FIBRILLATION          89

Atrial ﬁbrillation
Atrial ﬁbrillation is rapid, irregular, uncoordinated atrial activity, and is
associated with an irregular ventricular response.
Causes
Acute AF may be associated with: IHD (33%), heart failure (24%), hyperten-
sion (26%), and valvular heart disease (7%). Other cardiac causes are sick
sinus syndrome, pericarditis, inﬁltrative heart disease, cardiomyopathy,
myocardititis, congenital heart disease, and post-cardiac surgery.
Non-cardiac causes include: sepsis, PE, thyrotoxicosis, electrocution,
lung or pleural disease, chest trauma, hypokalaemia, hypovolaemia,
hypothermia, drug abuse (eg cocaine). Paroxysmal AF sometimes occurs
in ﬁt athletes.
Holiday heart: binge drinking or occasionally alcohol withdrawal may
cause acute AF in patients with no other predisposing factors. AF usually
resolves spontaneously within 48hr. The diagnosis of ‘holiday heart’ is one
of exclusion after cardiac disease and other causes have been ruled out.
Clinical features
AF d cardiac output by 10–20%, irrespective of underlying ventricular
rate. Clinical presentation varies according to the cause and effect of
the AF. Some patients are asymptomatic; others suffer life-threatening
complications (heart failure, angina). Patients with underlying IHD may
develop ischaemia during periods of rapid ventricular rate.
Treatment
Patients in AF can be treated with cardioversion or rate control. If signs of
shock, syncope, acute cardiac failure, or ischaemia are present, consider
electrical cardioversion under sedation. Patients may also be chemically
cardioverted with ﬂecainide 50–150mg IV (contraindicated in patients with
cardiac disease) or amiodarone 300mg IV (safer in patients with cardiac
disease). Both drugs may cause hypotension. If the patient has had symp-
toms for longer than 48hr, they are at risk of cardiac thromboembolism
and stroke when cardioverted, so instead, give rate control medications
and commence IV or low molecular weight heparin. Rate control drugs
include metoprolol 5mg IV and diltiazem (IV form not available in UK).
Digoxin 500mcg IV is the drug of choice in patients with CCF. See 2006
NICE guidelines (www.nice.org.uk).
Atrial ﬁbrillation in Wolff Parkinson White syndrome
This may result in an irregular, broad complex tachycardia. Impulses are
conducted from the atria via the AV node and an accessory pathway.
Do not give AV-blocking drugs (digoxin, verapamil, or adenosine) as this
can result in acceleration of conduction through the accessory pathway,
leading to cardiovascular collapse or VF. Seek expert help.
Atrial ﬂutter
The typical atrial rate is 300/min, so a regular 2:1 block will give a QRS
rate of 150/min. Variable block may result in an irregular rate. Consult
with an expert to discuss treatment.
90    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Hypertensive problems
     Bear the following points in mind when managing a hypertensive patient
     in the ED:
     • Most patients with hypertension are asymptomatic.
     • Hypertension is an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease and
        stroke.
     • Most patients found to be hypertensive in the ED do not require any
        immediate intervention or treatment, but do require careful follow-
        up—usually by their GP.
     • Never intervene on the basis of a single raised BP measurement in the
        absence of any associated symptoms and signs.
     Approach
     Approach patients found to be hypertensive as follows:
     • Those with no previous history of hypertension, and no other concerns
       or history of other conditions (eg diabetes, peripheral vascular disease,
       IHD, or stroke)—arrange follow-up and monitoring with GP.
     • Those known to be hypertensive already on treatment—arrange
       follow-up and monitoring with GP.
     • Those displaying evidence of end organ damage (eg LV hypertrophy,
       retinal changes, renal impairment)—refer to the medical team.
     • Those with hypertension associated with pain, vasoconstriction (eg acute
       pulmonary oedema) or stroke—treat underlying cause where possible.
       Do not intervene in stroke associated hypertension except under the
       direction of a neurologist or stroke specialist.
     • Those with hypertension directly associated with symptoms or
       signs—contact the medical team and consider whether intervention
       is appropriate (see below).
     Mild/moderate hypertension (diastolic 100–125mmHg)
     Ascertain if the patient has a past history of hypertension and is taking drug
     therapy for this. Examine for retinal changes and evidence of hypertensive
     encephalopathy. Investigate as appropriate (U&E, urinalysis, CXR, ECG).
     Further management will depend upon the BP and the exact circum-
     stances. If the BP is moderately elevated (ie diastolic BP: 110–125mmHg)
     and the patient is symptomatic, refer to the medical team. If the patient is
     asymptomatic with normal examination and renal function, he/she may be
     suitable for GP follow up.
                                              HYPERTENSIVE PROBLEMS            91

Severe hypertension (diastolic >125mmHg)
Patients with a diastolic BP >125mmHg require urgent assessment. Search
for evidence of hypertensive encephalopathy: headache, nausea, vomiting,
confusion, retinal changes (haemorrhages, exudates, papilloedema), ﬁts,
focal neurological signs, d conscious level. Ask about recent drug ingestion
(eg ecstasy or cocaine—b pp. 214 & 215).
Investigations
Insert an IV cannula and send blood for U&E, creatinine, and glucose. Obtain
a CXR and ECG, and perform urinalysis. If there is d conscious level, focal
signs, or other clinical suspicion that the hypertension may be secondary to
stroke or intracranial haemorrhage, arrange an emergency CT scan.
Management
• Refer patients with a diastolic pressure >125mmHg or evidence of
  hypertensive encephalopathy to the medical team. Resist commencing
  emergency treatment until consultation with an expert. There is a sig-
  niﬁcant risk of complications (stroke or MI) if the BP is reduced rapidly.
  It may be appropriate to commence oral antihypertensive therapy using
  a B-blocker (eg atenolol or labetalol) or calcium channel blocker (eg
  nifedipine).
• If treatment is appropriate, commence an IVI of sodium nitroprusside,
  labetalol or GTN with continuous BP monitoring via an arterial line and
  admit to high dependency unit (HDU) or ICU. Sodium nitroprusside
  has a very short half-life (81–2min) and acts as a vasodilator of both
  arterioles and veins. IV labetolol may be preferred if aortic dissection
  (b p.92) or phaeochromocytoma are suspected.
• Beta-blockers are contraindicated in hypertension caused by cocaine,
  amphetamine or related sympathomimetic drugs (b p.215), since
  B-blockade may cause unopposed A-adrenergic activity with paradox-
  ical hypertension and d coronary blood ﬂow.
Hypertension in pregnancy
Hypertension may be part of pre-eclampsia or eclampsia (see b p.592).
Pre-eclampsia is diagnosed with 2 or more of: hypertension (>140/90),
proteinuria and oedema. This can be associated with haemolysis,
elevated liver function tests (LFTs), low platelets (HELLP syndrome).
Check urine for protein and check blood for FBC, LFT, platelets, and
coagulation screen. Call for senior obstetric help. Eclampsia is diagnosed
with the onset of grand mal seizures after 20 weeks gestation, and carries
a signiﬁcant mortality rate.
92    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Aortic dissection
     Remember: hypertensive patients with sudden, severe chest, and/or back
     pain may have acute aortic dissection.
     Pathology
     Aortic dissection is longitudinal splitting of the muscular aortic media
     by a column of blood. The dissection may spread proximally (possibly
     resulting in aortic incompetence, coronary artery blockage, cardiac
     tamponade), distally (possibly involving the origin of various arteries), or
     rupture internally back into the aortic lumen, or externally (eg into the
     mediastinum, resulting in rapid exsanguination).
     More than 70% of patients have a history of hypertension. It occurs
     more frequently in those with bicuspid aortic valve, Marfan’s syndrome
     or Ehlers–Danlos syndrome. Up to 20% follow recent cardiac surgery or
     recent angiography/angioplasty.
     Dissection may be classiﬁed Stanford type ‘A’ or ‘B’, according to whether
     the ascending aorta is involved or not, respectively. Overall mortality is
     30% (35% type A and 15% type B).

                         Type A                               Type B

     Fig. 3.21
                                                    AORTIC DISSECTION           93

History
Aortic dissection may mimic the presentation of an MI, requiring a high
index of suspicion. It typically presents with abrupt onset sharp, tearing or
ripping pain (maximal at onset) in anterior or posterior chest. Migration of
the pain may reﬂect extension of the dissection. Syncope occurs in 810%
of patients, sometimes in the absence of any pain. Occasionally, patients
can present with neurological deﬁcit associated with chest pain.
Examination
The patient is usually apprehensive and distressed, with pain which is dif-
ﬁcult to alleviate, even using IV opioid. Clues to the diagnosis include:
• An aortic regurgitation murmur (30%).
• Asymmetry or absence of peripheral pulses or a pulse deﬁcit (15–20%).
• Hypertension.
• Hypotension with features of tamponade or neurological signs in asso-
  ciation with pain (eg secondary to spinal/carotid artery involvement).
Investigations
• Send blood for U&E, glucose, FBC, coagulation, and cross-matching.
• Obtain an ECG and CXR.
Thoracic aortic dissection usually results in an abnormal CXR. One or
more of the following changes may be seen:
• A widened or abnormal mediastinum (present in 875%).
• A ‘double knuckle’ aorta.
• Left pleural effusion (820%).
• Deviation of the trachea or nasogastric (NG) tube to the right.
• Separation of two parts of the wall of a calciﬁed aorta by >5mm (the
  ‘calcium sign’).
The ECG may demonstrate MI, LVH. or ischaemia.
Note thatu812% of patients with aortic dissection have a normal CXR
and 830% have a normal ECG.
CT angiography or formal angiography will provide the deﬁnitive diagnosis.
In a haemodynamically unstable patient, trans-oesophageal echo in theatre
may be the investigation of choice.
Management
On suspicion of aortic dissection:
• Provide O2 by face mask as appropriate.
• Insert 2 large-bore (14G) IV cannulae and cross-match for 6U (inform
  blood bank of suspected diagnosis).
• Give IV morphine and titrate according to response (± anti-emetic).
• Call cardiothoracic team and cardiologist at an early stage.
• Insert an arterial line (preferably right radial artery) and discuss with
  specialist teams how to control the BP (eg labetalol infusion).
• Arrange further investigation based upon specialist advice and available
  resources (eg aortography, echocardiography, CT scan, MRI).
Type A dissections are usually treated surgically; type B lesions are usually
treated medically.
94    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Haemoptysis
     Haemoptysis may be the chief or sole complaint of patients presenting to
     the ED. It always warrants investigation.
     Causes of haemoptysis
     Respiratory      • Infection (URTI, pneumonia, TB, lung abscess)
                      • Carcinoma (bronchial or laryngeal)
                      • Bronchiectasis
     Cardiovascular   • Pulmonary oedema
                      • PE
                      • Ruptured aortic aneurysm (aorto-bronchial ﬁstula)
     Coagulation      • Drugs (eg warfarin, heparin)
     disorder         • Inherited (eg Haemophilia, Christmas disease)
     Trauma           • Penetrating or blunt
     Other            • Goodpasture’s, Wegener’s granulomatosis

     Presentation
     Ascertain the exact nature and volume (eg ‘bright red streaks’ or
     ‘dark brown granules’). Patients sometimes have surprising difﬁculty
     distinguishing vomited blood from that coughed up. Enquire about weight
     loss, and take a drug history and smoking history.
     Investigation
     • Send blood for FBC, coagulation screen, U&E, LFTs.
     • Request Group and Save if evidence of signiﬁcant haemorrhage.
     • If SpO2 <94% on air, or the patient has COPD, check ABG.
     • Obtain CXR and ECG.
     • Perform urinalysis—if shocked, insert catheter and monitor output.
     • Collect sputum samples. Send for microscopy, culture, and sensitivity.
     • Initiate further investigations according to the likely diagnosis.
     Treatment
     • Airway: clear and secure (coughing/suction). Put on a face mask and
       shield if maintaining the airway or intubating. Ensure nearby high ﬂow
       suction. Massive haemorrhage may require tracheal intubation. Whilst
       preparing for this, tilt trolley so that the patient is head-down.
     • Breathing: provide O2 to maintain saturations at 94–98%. If ventilation is
       inadequate, assist with bag and mask or tracheal tube.
     • Circulation: insert a large bore (14G) IV cannula (use 2 if hypovolaemic).
       Give IV ﬂuids/blood/clotting factors as clinically indicated (b p.172).
     Further treatment
     Commence speciﬁc treatment measures aimed at life-threatening
     underlying cause (eg LVF, PE, infection, coagulopathy). In cases of large
     haemoptysis, it is appropriate to admit for further investigation and treat-
     ment. If the patient is stable and has only had a small amount of blood
     stained sputum, urgent outpatient investigation may be appropriate.
                                                                  OXYGEN         95

Oxygen
Oxygen is the most commonly administered hospital therapy. In recent
years, high ﬂow oxygen was widely used in the treatment of medical
and surgical emergencies, and initial resuscitation. There is now a move
towards safer treatment with controlled oxygen therapy.
Common problems
• Failure to prescribe oxygen.
• Failure to check ABG in patients requiring oxygen therapy.
• Failure to monitor or review patients on oxygen therapy.
• Inadvertent administration of another gas other than oxygen.
• Inadvertent disconnection from the oxygen supply.
• Depletion of an oxygen tank during transfer (www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk).
Oxygen cylinders
When administering oxygen in the ED, always use piped oxygen from the
wall outlet. Only use an oxygen cylinder when transporting the patient
to the radiology department or ward. Oxygen is highly ﬂammable. Do
not take a cylinder out of its support cage and never let it fall. In the UK,
oxygen cylinders are colour-coded white. The commonest small cylinder
is B (or M-6), which holds 170L oxygen. The commonest large cylinder is
E (or M-24), holding 680L. Before a patient leaves the ED, always check
that the cylinder is full. If the patient is being transferred to another hos-
pital, check there is enough oxygen for the journey. The formula is:
        Volume of cylinder in L/ﬂow rate = minutes cylinder will last
Oxygen requirements
The aim of oxygen therapy is to optimize tissue oxygen delivery. Use pulse
oximetry to guide whether the patient requires supplemental oxygen. In
previously healthy patients, aim for SpO2 94–98%, but in patients with
known COPD or type II respiratory failure, aim for SpO2 88–92%. Always
take an ABG in patients with chronic lung disease, to assess their optimal
oxygen treatment (see b p.98 on ABG interpretation). Repeat the ABG
within 30 min after changing the inspired oxygen concentration. When
assessing a critically ill patient, it is appropriate to give high ﬂow oxygen
and to titrate the inspired oxygen concentration (FiO2) down according
to the ABG results.
Oxygen delivery
• Use a high concentration oxygen reservoir mask (non-rebreathing
  mask) in hypoxic patients without chronic lung disease.
• Use a simple face mask for patients with a mild hypoxia, without chronic
  lung disease.
• Use a 28% Venturi mask for patients with COPD or known type II respi-
  ratory failure.
• Use a tracheostomy mask for patients with tracheostomy.
Prescribing oxygen
The oxygen prescription should include the target SpO2, the oxygen mask
type and oxygen ﬂow rate. In an emergency, it is appropriate to administer
oxygen prior to prescribing, but do not forget to prescribe the oxygen
after resuscitation. See www.brit-thoracic.org.uk.
96    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     The dyspnoeic patient
     The normal adult respiratory rate is 11–18/min, with a tidal volume of
     400–800mL. Acute dyspnoea is a common presenting symptom.
     Common causes of acute dyspnoea
     Cardiac
     • Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (b p.100).
     • MI (b p.68).
     • PE (b p.120).
     • Arrhythmias (b p.80).
     Respiratory
     • Asthma (b p.104) or exacerbation of COPD (b p.108).
     • Pneumonia (b p.110).
     • Pleural effusion (b p.103).
     • Pneumothorax (b p.114).
     Trauma
     • Aspiration of FB or vomit (b p.112).
     • Pneumothorax/haemothorax (b p.334).
     • Flail chest (b p.332).
     • Drowning incident (b p.258).
     Other
     • Hypovolaemia or fever from any cause.
     • Hyperventilation syndrome (b p.97).
     • Respiratory compensation for metabolic acidosis (DKA, salicylate over-
       dose).
     Approach
     Follow the ABC approach and resuscitate as necessary. The main aim of
     treatment is to correct life-threatening hypoxia. Enquire about speed of
     onset of dyspnoea, past medical history and associated symptoms (cough,
     haemoptysis, fever, wheezing, chest pain). Examine carefully, paying atten-
     tion to the respiratory rate, depth, and pattern. Apply a pulse oximeter.
     Pulse oximetry
     This is simple, rapid, safe, and non-invasive, but it does not provide infor-
     mation about ventilation or arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide
     (pCO2). A normal oxygen saturation does not exclude signiﬁcant lung
     pathology (eg PE). Pulse oximetry may be inaccurate or misleading in:
     • Poor peripheral perfusion/shock.
     • Methaemoglobinaemia.
     • Hypothermia.
     • CO poisoning (see b p.208). SpO2 values may be falsely high as COHb
       reads as oxyhaemoglobin. COHb can be measured on venous blood
       gas testing or COHb pulse oximeter.
     • Nail varnish/synthetic ﬁngernails (if a ﬁnger probe is used).
     • Excessive movement.
     Correlate readings with clinical ﬁndings: a non-pulsatile trace (or heart
     rate different from that on cardiac monitor) suggests the saturation
     reading is probably inaccurate.
                                                     HYPERVENTILATION            97

Hyperventilation
Hyperventilation is breathing which occurs more deeply and/or more
rapidly than normal. CO2 is ‘blown off ’, so that pCO2 d. Hyperventilation
may be primary (‘psychogenic’) or secondary. A classical secondary cause
is DKA—Kussmaul’s respiration represents respiratory compensation for
a metabolic acidosis.
Secondary causes of hyperventilation
• Metabolic acidosis (eg DKA, uraemia, sepsis, hepatic failure).
• Poisoning (eg aspirin, methanol, CO, cyanide, ethylene glycol).
• Pain/hypoxia.
• Hypovolaemia.
• Respiratory disorders (eg PE, asthma, pneumothorax).
Primary (psychogenic or inappropriate) hyperventilation
Typically, the patient is agitated and distressed with a past history of panic
attacks or episodes of hyperventilation. They may complain of dizziness,
circumoral paraesthesia, carpopedal spasm, and occasionally sharp or
stabbing chest pain. Initial examination reveals tachypnoea with equal
air entry over both lung ﬁelds, and no wheeze or evidence of airway
obstruction. It is important to consider secondary causes (such as PE or
DKA). Therefore, perform the following investigations:
• SpO2.
• ECG.
• ABG if SpO2 d, or if symptoms do not completely settle in a few
   minutes.
• BMG.
If symptoms do not completely settle in a few minutes, obtain:
• CXR.
• U&E, blood glucose, FBC.
Treatment
Do not sedate a patient who is hyperventilating. Once serious diagnoses
have been excluded, use this information to help reassure the patient with
primary hyperventilation. Often this is all that is required, but it may be
helpful to try simple breathing exercises (breathe in through nose—count
of 8, out through mouth—count of 8, hold for count of 4 and repeat).
Discharge the patient with arrangements for GP follow-up. If these simple
measures fail, reconsider the diagnosis and refer the patient to the medical
team for subsequent observation and treatment.
98    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

     Arterial blood gases
     Blood gas sampling is useful in assessing breathless patients, septic patients,
     diabetic patients in ketoacidosis, those who are critically ill and patients
     who have ingested poisons. This enables rapid measurement of blood pH,
     bicarbonate, O2 and CO2. Most ED blood gas analysers will also measure
     blood glucose, K+, Hb, and lactate, so arterial or venous blood gas sampling
     will also test for anaemia, hyperkalaemia, and hypoglycaemia.
     Assessing respiratory function
     Arterial sampling helps in the assessment of a patient with low SpO2,
     or in patients with known lung disease (especially if they are receiving
     supplemental oxygen). If possible (caution required), take the ﬁrst sample
     with the patient breathing room air. If this is not possible, document the
     inspired oxygen concentration. Look speciﬁcally for:
     • Hypoxia, (pO2 <10.6kPa on air).
     • Hypercarbia, (pCO2 >6.0kPa).
     • Bicarbonate retention (HCO3– >28mmol/L).
     • Acidosis (pH <7.35).
     Differentiating between type I and type II respiratory failure
     In type I failure there is hypoxia with normal or d pCO2. In type II failure,
     there is hypoxia with i pCO2, and frequently an i HCO3–. In type II failure,
     the patient may develop life-threatening respiratory failure if administered
     high concentrations of oxygen. Aim to maintain SpO2 at 88–92%, and
     recheck ABGs in 30min.
     Differentiating between acute and chronic type II respiratory failure
     Patients who normally have a slightly i pCO2 will also show i HCO3–
     on ABG. The kidneys adapt over a period of days to retain bicarbonate,
     in attempt to buffer the respiratory acidosis (see nomogram inside front
     cover). Respiratory acidosis in a patient with chronic type II respira-
     tory failure (i pCO2, i HCO3– and pH <7.35) indicates life-threatening
     impairment of lung function.
     In acute respiratory failure, the lungs are unable to eliminate CO2 (caused
     by d GCS or hypoventilation from any cause), which results in i pCO2 and
     a respiratory acidosis. Patients may require ventilatory support.
     A venous blood sample will give accurate readings for K+, lactate, glucose,
     HCO3–, Hb and COHb. In addition, a normal venous pCO2 will exclude
     hypercarbia.
     Other blood gas results
     Blood gas analysers calculate the base excess from the HCO3– concentra-
     tion and pH. Levels <–2mmol/L indicate that the patient has a metabolic
     acidosis. Levels >2mmol/L indicate a metabolic alkalosis (for example, as a
     result of chronic bicarbonate retention in type II respiratory failure).
                                               ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES            99

Metabolic acidosis
The usual pattern of results in metabolic acidosis is pH<7.35, HCO3–
<24mmol/L and BE <–2mmol/L. There may be compensatory hypocarbia
(pCO2<4.5kPa). Metabolic acidosis has many possible causes:
• i Acid load (lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis, or ingestion of salicylates,
  methanol, ethylene glycol, or metformin).
• d Removal of acid (renal failure or renal tubular acidosis types 1 and 4).
• Loss of bicarbonate from the body (diarrhoea, pancreatic, or intestinal
  ﬁstulas, acetazolamide, or renal tubular acidosis type 2).
The anion gap
The anion gap is the quantity of anions not balanced out by cations,
(a measurement of negatively charged plasma proteins). The normal value
is 12–16mmol/L. It is measured by:
          (Na+ + K+) – (Cl– + HCO3–) all measured in mmol/L
Measuring the anion gap helps distinguish the cause of a metabolic acidosis.
A high anion gap indicates that there is excess H+ in the body. The
commonest cause of a high anion gap metabolic acidosis is lactic acidosis.
Most blood gas analysers will measure lactate (normal <2.0mmol/L).
Causes of a lactic acidosis
• Tissue hypoperfusion (trauma with major haemorrhage, septic shock).
• Tissue hypoxia (hypoxaemia, carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning).
• Hepatic failure.
• Renal failure.
• Ethylene glycol or methanol poisoning (b p.203; b p.202).
• Cocaine or amphetamines (b p.215).
• Salicylate poisoning (b p.189) or iron poisoning (b p.201).
• Biguanides (metformin).
• Isoniazid.
• Strenuous exercise.
The other causes of a high anion gap metabolic acidosis are ketoacidosis
(diabetic or alcohol induced) and renal failure.
Causes of a normal anion gap metabolic acidosis are chronic diarrhoea,
pancreatic or intestinal ﬁstulas, acetazolamide, or renal tubular acidosis.
The osmolal gap
This is the difference between calculated serum osmolarity and laboratory
measured serum osmolality. Serum osmolarity can be calculated by:
          (2 × Na+) + urea + glucose (all measured in mmol/L)
Subtract the calculated result from the laboratory measured osmolality to
give the osmolal gap. Normally this is <10mOsm/kg.
An elevated osmolal gap can be caused by alcohol, methanol, ethylene
glycol or acetone ingestion, mannitol, or sorbitol.
100    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
      Left heart failure results inei left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, causing
      i pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure. Fluid collects in extravascular
      pulmonary tissues faster than the lymphatics clear it.
      Causes of cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
      Often an acute complication of MI and IHD, or exacerbation of pre-ex-
      isting cardiac disease (eg hypertension, aortic/mitral valve disease). Other
      causes are:
      • Arrhythmias.
      • Failure of prosthetic heart valve.
      • Ventricular septal defect.
      • Cardiomyopathy.
      • Negatively inotropic drugs (eg B-blockers).
      • Acute myocarditis.
      • Left atrial (LA) myxoma (may produce syncope, fever, i ESR, but is very
         rare).
      • Pericardial disease.
      The history is frequently dramatic. Dyspnoea and distress may prevent
      a full history from being taken. Find out the length of the history and
      whether there is any chest pain. Check current drug therapy/allergies and
      establish what emergency prehospital treatment has been administered.
      Examination usually reveals a tachypnoeic, tachycardic, and anxious
      patient. If the pulmonary oedema is severe, the patient may be cyanosed,
      coughing up frothy pink sputum and unable to talk. Check pulse and BP,
      auscultate the heart for murmurs, and 3rd/4th heart sounds of gallop
      rhythm. Look for i JVP (also a feature of PE and cardiac tamponade). Listen
      to the lung ﬁelds—ﬁne inspiratory crepitations (crackles) may be limited
      to the bases or be widespread. Wheeze may be more prominent than
      crepitations. Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema is associated with evidence
      of d cardiac output (sweaty, peripherally cool, and pale). Consider other
      diagnoses (eg sepsis) in patients with warm, ﬂushed extremities.
      Investigation
      Commence treatment before completing investigations:
      • Attach a cardiac monitor and check SpO2 with pulse oximeter.
      • Obtain ECG. Check for arrhythmias, LAD, LVH, LBBB, recent or
        evolving MI.
      • Send blood for U&E, glucose, FBC, troponin.
      • If severely ill or SpO2<94% in air obtain ABG.
      • Request old hospital notes/ECGs.
      • Obtain a CXR and look for features of cardiogenic pulmonary oedema:
          • upper lobe diversion (distension of upper pulmonary veins)
          • cardiomegaly (LV and/or LA dilatation)
          • Kerley A, B, or C septal lines
          • ﬂuid in interlobar ﬁssures
          • peribronchial/perivascular cufﬁng and micronodules
          • pleural effusions
          • bat’s wing hilar shadows.
                                CARDIOGENIC PULMONARY OEDEMA                  101

Treat urgently. Provide the following within the ﬁrst few minutes:
• Check that the airway is clear.
• Raise the back of the trolley to sit the patient up and support with
  pillows if necessary.
• Provide high ﬂow O2 by tight-ﬁtting face mask.
• If systolic BP >90mmHg, give 2 puffs of GTN SL (800mcg) and com-
  mence GTN IVI, starting at 10mcg/min, i every few minutes according
  to clinical response (monitor BP closely; take special care to avoid
  hypotension). Alternatively try buccal GTN (3–5mg).
• Give IV furosemide 50mg. Larger doses may be needed in patients
  already taking oral furosemide.
• If the patient has chest pain or is distressed, give very small titrated
  increments of IV opioid (with anti-emetic). Do not give opioids to
  patients who are drowsy, confused. or exhausted as this may precipi-
  tate respiratory arrest.
• Consider inserting a urinary catheter and monitor urine output.
• Treat underlying cause and associated problems (arrhythmias, MI,
  cardiogenic shock, acute prosthetic valve failure).
Monitor the SpO2 and the clinical response to this initial treatment. Rapid
improvement may occur, due to venodilatation and reduction of preload.
If the patient does not improve, recheck ABG and consider:
• Non-invasive ventilation (continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
    or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP). Non-invasive ventilation
    (NIV) appears safe in acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema and may
    avoid the need for intubation.
• If hypotensive refer to ICU for treatment of cardiogenic shock (b
    p.77). An intra-arterial line, Swan–Ganz catheter and inotropic support
    (dobutamine) are likely to be required. Echocardiography may help to
    exclude valve or septal rupture and guide treatment.
• Rapid sequence intubation in the presence of cardiogenic pulmonary
    oedema may be associated with cardiovascular collapse. Stop nitrates
    prior to administering anaesthesia and be ready to give pressors
    ± ﬂuids immediately post-induction.
Prosthetic valve failure
Always consider valve failure in patients with prosthetic valves, of which
a large variety are in common use. All are associated with some risks
(eg embolism, failure, obstruction, infection, haemorrhage from associated
anticoagulation), which vary according to design. Acute failure of a pros-
thetic aortic or mitral valve results in dramatic acute onset pulmonary
oedema with loud murmurs. The patient may deteriorate rapidly and not
respond to standard drug treatment. Resuscitate as described above. CXR
will show a prosthetic heart valve ± pulmonary oedema. Call urgently
for expert help (ICU team, cardiologist, and cardiothoracic surgeon).
Emergency transthoracic or transoesphageal echocardiography conﬁrms
the diagnosis. Immediate valve replacement is required.
102    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
      Pulmonary oedema may occur in the absence of i pulmonary venous
      pressure. The following mechanisms may be responsible:
      • i Capillary permeability.
      • d Plasma oncotic pressure.
      • i Lymphatic pressure.
      Changes in capillary permeability, secondary to a variety of triggers, is
      the mechanism most frequently implicated in non-cardiogenic pulmonary
      oedema, when it occurs as the Adult Respiratory Distress Syndrome
      (ARDS). Since the mechanisms producing cardiogenic and non-cardiogenic
      pulmonary oedema differ, so the approach to treatment differs.
      Causes of non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
      • ARDS (sequel to sepsis, trauma, pancreatitis).
      • Intracranial (especially subarachnoid) haemorrhage.
      • IV ﬂuid overload.
      • Hypoalbuminaemia (liver failure, nephrotic syndrome).
      • Drugs/poisons/chemical inhalation.
      • Lymphangitis carcinomatosis.
      • Smoke inhalation.
      • Near drowning incidents.
      • High altitude mountain sickness.
      Approach
      Distinguishing non-cardiogenic from cardiogenic pulmonary oedema is
      usually apparent from the history. Evaluate the patient and resuscitate
      according to ABCs. Direct treatment towards the underlying cause and
      according to the physiological disturbance. To estimate the latter, invasive
      monitoring may be required (urinary, intra-arterial, central venous and
      pulmonary artery catheters). Involve ICU early and provide appropriate
      IV ﬂuids, inotropes, tracheal intubation, IPPV and positive end expiratory
      pressure (PEEP) as required.
                                                      PLEURAL EFFUSION          103

Pleural effusion
Under normal circumstances, each pleural cavity contains <20mL ﬂuid.
Causes
An exudate is diagnosed if the pleural ﬂuid:serum protein >0.5,
ﬂuid:serum LDH >0.6, or ﬂuid LDH >2/3 the upper limits of laboratory
normal value for serum LDH.
Exudates
• Pneumonia (bacterial, viral, mycoplasma).
• Malignancy (bronchial carcinoma, mesothelioma, lymphoma).
• TB.
• PE with pulmonary infarction.
• Collagen vascular disease (SLE, rheumatoid arthritis).
• Subphrenic abscess.
• Amoebic liver abscess.
• Pancreatitis.
• Chylothorax (thoracic duct injury—rare).
Transudates
• Cardiac failure.
• Nephrotic syndrome.
• Hepatic failure.
• Ovarian hyperstimulation.
• Ovarian ﬁbroma (Meig’s syndrome—rare).
• Peritoneal dialysis.
Clinical presentation
Symptoms are usually due to the underlying disease process. A mild dull
ache and dyspnoea (initially on exercise, later at rest) may occur if the
effusion is large. A history of vomiting followed by chest pain points to a
ruptured oesophagus—a surgical emergency.
Signs of an effusion are not apparent until >500mL are present. Dyspnoea,
stony dullness to percussion, with absent breath sounds over the effusion are
characteristic. Bronchial breathing may be heard just above the effusion.
Very large unilateral effusions may produce evidence of mediastinal shift
(away from the collection of ﬂuid).
Investigations
CXR can demonstrate pleural effusions as small as 250mL, as blunting of
the costophrenic angle. Other investigations depend on likely cause.
Treatment
Provide O2 and resuscitate as necessary, according to the underlying
pathology. Emergency therapeutic pleural aspiration is rarely required in
the ED, except where haemothorax is suspected. Refer to the medical
team for further investigation (including ultrasound guided diagnostic
pleural aspiration).
104    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Acute asthma: assessment
      Follow the British Thoracic Society guidelines (www.brit-thoracic.org.
      uk) to assess and manage adults presenting with asthma, b p.106. The
      guidelines reﬂect continuing concern over asthma deaths. Patients with
      severe asthma and one or more adverse psychosocial factors (psychiatric
      illness, alcohol or drug abuse, unemployment) have i mortality. Measure
      the peak expiratory ﬂow rate and compare it against that expected (see
      Fig. 3.22). The peak ﬂow acts as an immediate triage tool: remember that
      patients with life-threatening asthma may be too dyspnoeic to do this.
      Make an initial assessment of the severity of acute asthma based upon
      a combination of clinical features, peak ﬂow measurement and pulse
      oximetry as outlined below.
      Moderate exacerbation of asthma
      • Increasing symptoms.
      • Peak ﬂow 50–75% best or predicted.
      • No features of acute severe asthma (below).
      Acute severe asthma
      Any 1 of:
      • Inability to complete sentences in 1 breath.
      • Respiratory rate ≥25/min.
      • Heart rate ≥110/min.
      • Peak ﬂow 33–50% best or predicted.
      Life-threatening asthma
      A patient with severe asthma with any 1 of:
      • Cyanosis.
      • Exhaustion, confusion, coma.
      • Feeble respiratory effort.
      • SpO2<92%.
      • Silent chest.
      • Bradycardia, arrhythmia, hypotension.
      • pO2<8kPa.
      • Normal pCO2 (4.6–6.0kPa).
      • Peak ﬂow <33% best or predicted.
      Near fatal asthma
      • i pCO2 and/or requiring mechanical ventilation with i inﬂation
        pressures.
      Other investigations
      Obtain ABG if SpO2<92% or if there are other features of life-threatening
      asthma.
      Obtain a CXR (without delaying treatment) if there is:
      • Suspected pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax.
      • Suspected consolidation.
      • Life-threatening asthma.
      • Failure to respond to treatment satisfactorily.
      • Requirement for ventilation.
                                                          ACUTE ASTHMA: ASSESSMENT                    105

            660                                                                                 660
                                        75        190
            650                                                                                 650
                                        72        183
            640                                                                                 640
                                        69        175             MEN
            630                                                                                 630
            620                         66        167                                           620
            610                          63 160                                                 610
                                        Ht. Ht.
            600                         (ins) (cms)                                             600
            590                                                                                 590
            580                                                                                 580
            570                                                                                 570
            560                                                                                 560
            550                                                                                 550
            540            STANDARD DEVIATION MEN              48 = litres/min                  540

PEF L/min
            530          STANDARD DEVIATION WOMEN              42 = litres/min                  530
            520                                                                                 520
            510                                                                                 510
            500                         69                                                      500
                                              175               WOMEN
            490                         66                                                      490
                                              167
            480                                                                                 480
                                        63    160
            470                                                                                 470
                                        60    152
            460                                                                                 460
                                        57    145                                               450
            450
                                         Ht.   Ht.
            440                         (ins) (cms)                                             440
            430                                                                                 430
            420                                                                                 420
                   IN MEN, VALUES OF PEF UP TO 100 LITRES/MIN, LESS THAN
            410                                                                                 410
                   PREDICTED, AND IN WOMEN LESS THAN 85 LITRES/MIN, LESS
            400    THAN PREDICTED, ARE WITHIN NORMAL LIMITS.                                    400
            390                                                                                 390
            380                                                                                 380

                  15   20    25    30        35      40    45   50     55        60   65   70
                                                   AGE IN YEARS

Fig. 3.22 Peak expiratory ﬂow rates in normal adults.
Nunn AJ, Gregg I. (1989). New regression equations for predicting peak expiratory ﬂow in adults.
Br Med J 298: 1068–70.
106    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Acute asthma: management
      Initial treatment
      Follow BTS/SIGN guidelines (www.brit-thoracic.org.uk) summarized as
      follows:
      • Provide high ﬂow O2.
      • Put the trolley back and side rails up so the patient is sitting up and
         holding on to the side rails (to use pectoral muscles as accessory
         muscles of respiration).
      • If the patient cannot talk, start treatment, but get senior ED and ICU
         help in case intubation and ventilation are required.
      • Check trachea and chest signs for pneumothorax.
      • Ask about previous admissions to ICU.
      • Administer high dose nebulized B2 agonist (eg salbutamol 5mg or terbu-
         taline 10mg), or 10 puffs of salbutamol into spacer device and face mask.
         For severe asthma or asthma that reponds poorly to the initial neb-
         ulizer, consider continuous nebulization.
      • Give a corticosteroid: either prednisolone 40–50mg PO or hydrocorti-
         sone (preferably as sodium succinate) 100mg IV.
      • Add nebulized ipratropium bromide (500mcg) to B2 agonist treatment
         for patients with acute severe or life-threatening asthma or those with a
         poor initial response to B2 agonist therapy.
      • Consider a single dose of IV magnesium sulphate (1.2–2g IVI over 20min)
         after consultation with senior medical staff, for patients with acute
         severe asthma without a good initial response to inhaled bronchodi-
         lator therapy or for those with life-threatening or near-fatal asthma.
      • Use IV aminophylline only after consultation with senior medical staff.
         Some individual patients with near-fatal or life-threatening asthma with a
         poor response to initial therapy may gain additional beneﬁt. The loading
         dose of IVI aminophylline is 5mg/kg over 20min unless on maintenance
         therapy, in which case check blood theophylline level and start IVI of
         aminophylline at 0.5–0.7mg/kg/hr.
      • IV salbutamol is an alternative in severe asthma, after consultation with
         senior staff. Draw up 5mg salbutamol into 500mL 5% dextrose and run
         at a rate of 30–60mL/hr.
      • A patient who cannot talk will be unable to drink ﬂuids and may be
         dehydrated.
      • Avoid ‘routine’ antibiotics.
      • Repeat ABG within an hour.
      • Hypokalaemia may be caused or exacerbated by B2 agonist and/or
         steroid therapy.
                                        ACUTE ASTHMA: MANAGEMENT                107

Criteria for admission
Admit patients with any features of
• A life-threatening or near-fatal attack.
• Severe attack persisting after initial treatment.
Management of discharge
Consider for discharge those patients whose peak ﬂow is >75% best or
predicted 1hr after initial treatment. Prescribe a short course of oral pred-
nisolone (eg 40–50mg for 5 days) if initial peak expiratory ﬂow rate (PEFR)
<50%, and ensure adequate supply of inhalers. If possible arrange for
review by an asthma liaison nurse before discharge. At a minimum, inhaler
technique and peak expiratory ﬂow monitoring should be reviewed.
Arrange/advise GP/asthma liaison nurse follow-up within 2 days. Fax or email
the discharge summary to GP. Advise to return to hospital if symptoms
worsen/recur.
Referral to intensive care unit
Refer any patient requiring ventilatory support or with acute severe or
life-threatening asthma failing to respond to therapy, evidenced by:
• Drowsiness, confusion.
• Exhaustion, feeble respiration.
• Coma or respiratory arrest.
• Persisting or worsening hypoxia.
• Hypercapnoea.
• ABG showing d pH.
• Deteriorating peak ﬂow.
Cardiac arrest in acute asthma
The underlying rhythm is usually PEA. This may reﬂect one or more
of the following: prolonged severe hypoxia (secondary to severe
bronchospasm and mucous plugging), hypoxia-related arrhythmias or
tension pneumothorax (may be bilateral). Give advanced life support
according to the guidelines in b Cardiac arrest, p.46 and treat tension
pneumothorax if present (b p.328). Aim to achieve tracheal intubation
early in view of the higher than normal required lung inﬂation pressures
and the attendant risk of gastric inﬂation in the absence of a tracheal tube.
108    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      COPD
      Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by
      chronic airﬂow limitation due to impedance to expiratory airﬂow, mucosal
      oedema, infection, bronchospasm and bronchoconstriction due to d lung
      elasticity. Smoking is the main cause, but others are chronic asthma, α-1
      antitrypsin deﬁciency and chronic infection (eg bronchiectasis).
      History
      Exertional dyspnoea, cough, and sputum are usual complaints. Ask about:
      • Present treatment including inhalers, steroids, antibiotics, theophyllines,
        nebulizers, opiate analgesia, and home O2 treatment.
      • Past history: enquire about previous admissions and co-morbidity.
      • Exercise tolerance: how far can they walk on the ﬂat without stopping?
        How many stairs can they climb? Do they get out of the house?
      • Recent history: ask about wheeze and dyspnoea, sputum volume and
        colour. Chest injuries, abdominal problems and other infections may
        cause respiratory decompensation.
      • Read the hospital notes: have there been prior ICU assessments? Has the
        respiratory consultant advised whether ICU would be appropriate?
      Examination
      Examine for dyspnoea, tachypnoea, accessory muscle use, and lip-pursing.
      Look for hyperinﬂation (‘barrel chest’) and listen for wheeze or coarse
      crackles (large airway secretions). Cyanosis, plethora (due to secondary
      polycythaemia) and right heart failure (cor pulmonale) suggest advanced
      disease. Look for evidence of hypercarbia: tremor, bounding pulses,
      peripheral vasodilatation, drowsiness, or confusion.
      Check for evidence of other causes of acute dyspnoea, particularly: asthma
      (b p.104), pulmonary oedema (b p.100), pneumothorax (b p.114), PE
      (b p.120). Remember that these conditions may co-exist with COPD.
      Investigations
      • SpO2, respiratory rate, pulse rate, BP, To, and peak ﬂow (if possible).
      • CXR (look for pneumothorax, hyperinﬂation, bullae, and pneumonia).
      • ECG.
      • ABG (or capillary blood gas), documenting the FiO2. Use pCO2 to guide
        O2 therapy.
      • FBC, U&E, glucose, theophylline levels and, if pneumonia is suspected
        and/or pyrexial, blood cultures, CRP, and pneumococcal antigen.
      • Send sputum for microscopy and culture if purulent.
      Treatment
      Give O2—remember that hypercapnoea with O2 is multifactorial. The aim
      is to maintain SpO2 88–92% without precipitating respiratory acidosis or
      worsening hypercapnoea (see b Oxygen, p.95 and b Arterial blood
      gases, p.98). If the patient is known to have COPD and is drowsy or has
      a documented history of previous hypercapnoeic respiratory failure, give
      FiO2 of 28% via a Venturi mask and obtain ABG. Titrate up the FiO2 with
      serial ABG sampling until the minimum FiO2 that achieves SpO2 88–92%.
      Reduce inhaled oxygen concentration if SpO2 >92%.
                                                                    COPD        109

Give bronchodilators and steroids
• Give nebulized salbutamol 5mg or terbutaline 5–10mg.
• Consider adding nebulized ipratropium 0.5mg.
• Use O2 driven nebulizers unless the patient has hypercapnoeic, acidotic
  COPD, in which case use nebulizers driven by compressed air, supple-
  mented by O2 via nasal prongs at 1–4L/min.
• Give steroids (eg prednisolone 30mg PO stat or IV hydrocortisone
  100mg).
Other drug treatments
• Give antibiotics (eg amoxicillin, tetracycline, or clarithromycin) if the
  patient reports i purulent sputum, or there is clinical evidence of pneu-
  monia and/or consolidation on CXR.
• Consider IV aminophylline or salbutamol if there is an inadequate
  response to nebulized bronchodilators.
• Consider naloxone if the patient is taking an opioid analgesic that may
  cause respiratory depression.
See NICE guideline on COPD, 2010 (www.nice.org.uk).
Non-invasive ventilation (NIV)
NIV is recommended as standard early therapy for hypercapnoeic ventila-
tory failure during exacerbations of COPD. NIV will improve the blood
gas measurements in the ED, d intubation rates, d mortality, and length
of hospital stay.
NIV takes two forms—CPAP and BiPAP, (which may be more suitable for
treating type II respiratory failure in COPD). Both CPAP and BiPAP have
been used to treat acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. Patients with
sleep apnoea use CPAP at night. The positive airway pressure is delivered
by a tightly adhered face mask, which is sized to ﬁt the patient. The patient
is awake, and must be compliant with wearing the mask.
Unlike tracheal intubation, NIV does not protect the airway. Therefore,
contraindications include coma and vomiting. Absolute contraindications
include apnoea and cardiac arrest. A pneumothorax will be converted into
a tension pneuomthorax with NIV. Severe agitation may make effective
NIV impossible.
The patient should always be cared for by staff who are familiar with the
ventilator and mask, in the resuscitation room.
Start BiPAP at 10cmH2O inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP)/
5cmH2O expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP), and titrate upwards:
• To treat persistent hypercapnoea, increase IPAP by 2cm at a time.
• To treat persistent hypoxia, increase IPAP and EPAP by 2cm at a time.
• The maximum IPAP/EPAP is 25/15cmH2O.
• For CPAP, commence treatment at 5–8cmH2O.
110    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Pneumonia
      Pneumonia involves symptoms and signs of lower respiratory tract
      infection (breathlessness, productive cough, and fever) usually associated
      with CXR abnormalities. Pneumocystis pneumonia may occur with minimal
      or no CXR changes. Consider pneumonia in patients with septicaemia or
      acute confusional states.
      Causes
      Bacterial (80–90%) Streptococcus pneumoniae is the commonest cause of
      community-acquired pneumonia. Others include Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
      Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, Legionella, Chlamydia psittaci, Staphylococcus
      aureus (can cause fulminant pneumonia in patients with inﬂuenza). Gram
      –ve and anaerobic infections are rare. Always consider TB, particularly
      in chronic alcoholism, poor social circumstances, immigrants and those
      travelling to developing countries, or individuals not BCG vaccinated.
      Immunosuppressed patients (eg HIV, steroid therapy) are at i risk of TB
      and Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia.
      Viral (10–20%) Predominantly inﬂuenza A&B, respiratory synctal virus
      (RSV), rarely varicella and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).
      Rickettsial (1%) Rarely, Coxiella burnetti.
      Signs and symptoms
      Fever, cough, and production of sputum are common complaints.
      Breathlessness, pleuritic chest pain, myalgia, rigors, or haemoptysis may
      occur. Pneumonia can present without obvious chest signs: Mycoplasma
      pneumonia may present in children and young adults with sore throat,
      headache, nausea, abdominal pain and diarrhoea. Legionella can present
      with constitutional upset, diarrhoea or confusion, particularly in the
      elderly. Pneumocystis pneumonia in immunosuppressed patients may
      present with cough, dyspnoea, and marked hypoxia, with relatively few
      other ﬁndings.
      Examination and investigation
      • Check respiratory rate, pulse, and BP.
      • Auscultation may reveal a patch of inspiratory crackles, signs of consoli-
        dation are present in <25%.
      • Check BMG, SpO2 (obtain ABG if <94%, or known to have COPD).
      • Assess for signs of SIRS (2 or more of RR>20, HR>90, temp>38.3oC
        or <36.0oC, WCC<4 or >12 × 1012/L, confusion, glucose >8.3mmol/L),
        which in combination with signs of pneumonia signify sepsis.
      • Assess for signs of severe sepsis (sepsis + signs of organ dysfunction
        b p.59). Oxygen dependence, poor urine output, systolic BP<90mmHg,
        blood lactate >3mmol/L. Commence ﬂuid resuscitation immediately if
        present, take blood cultures and give IV antibiotics.
      • Obtain CXR. Look for patchy or lobar opaciﬁcation, mass lesions, or an
        air bronchogram. In early pneumonia the CXR may be normal.
      • Obtain blood cultures, sputum cultures, and consider urinary pneumo-
        coccal and Legionella antigen testing.
                                                              PNEUMONIA          111

Assessment: admit or discharge
Some patients with ‘mild’ illness, good social circumstances, and no signiﬁ-
cant co-morbidity may be safely discharged with appropriate antibiotics
(eg amoxicillin 0.5–1g PO tds), simple analgesia for pleuritic pain to aid
deep breathing/coughing and GP follow-up.
Patients with CURB-65 score ≥3 have severe pneumonia with a high risk of
death; those who score 2 are at i risk of death and should be considered
for inpatient treatment or hospital-supervised outpatient care; patients
with CURB-65 score 0 or 1 are at low risk of death and may be suitable
for home treatment (www.brit-thoracic.org.uk; see Table 3.4).

 Table 3.4
 CURB-65 score for pneumonia                                       Score
 Confusion                                                         1
 Urea >7mmol/L                                                     1
 Respiratory rate ≥30/min                                          1
 Low BP (systolic <90mmHg or diastolic ≤60mmHg)                    1
 Age ≥65 years                                                     1

Treatment
Patients deemed suitable for discharge
Provide simple analgesia, oral antibiotics, and GP follow-up.
Patients admitted, but not severely unwell
Start either oral or IV antibiotics, as follows:
• Either amoxicillin 0.5–1g PO tds + erythromycin 500mg PO qds (or
  clarithromycin 500mg bd).
• Or if IV therapy is needed: ampicillin 500mg IV qds + erythromycin
  500mg IV qds (or clarithromycin 500mg bd). Local guidelines will apply.
• Monitor SpO2 and provide O2 accordingly.
• Provide simple analgesia.
Patients with sepsis or severe sepsis (see b p.59)
Commence IV crystalloid ﬂuids, take blood cultures and administer IV
antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav 1.2g IV tds + clarithromycin 500mg IV bd)
immediately. Contact ICU and make preparations for arterial line, central
line and urinary catheter insertion. Aim for CVP >8mmHg, MAP>65mmHg
and urine output >0.5mg/kg/hr. See severe sepsis guidelines (www.
survivingsepsis.org).
Differential diagnosis
Pneumonia-like presentations can occur with pulmonary oedema,
pulmonary infarction, pulmonary vasculitis (eg SLE, PAN, Churg–Strauss
and Wegener’s), aspergillosis, allergic alveolitis, bronchial or alveolar cell
carcinoma, acute pancreatitis, and subphrenic abscess.
112    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Pulmonary aspiration
      Aspiration of solid or liquid material into the upper and lower airways is
      likely when one or more of the following features are present:
      • d GCS: head injury, stroke, overdose, seizures, sedation, anaesthesia.
      • d Cough and/or gag reﬂexes: related to above factors and/or bulbar
         dysfunction, intubation/extubation, Guillain–Barré syndrome, multiple
         sclerosis, myasthenia gravis.
      • Tendency to regurgitate/vomit: alcohol, full stomach, upper GI tract
         pathology (including hiatus hernia, oesophageal obstruction, pregnancy).
      • May occur in inﬁrm or elderly fed via nasogastric tube.
      Clinical features
      Large food particles sufﬁcient to cause complete airway obstruction
      cause choking, inability to speak, i respiratory effort, cyanosis, loss of
      consciousness, and death. Smaller particles may pass through the vocal
      cords causing coughing, stridor, tachypnoea, and wheeze. 80% of patients
      are aged <4 years, with peanuts being the classic inhaled objects. Delayed
      presentation with cough, wheeze, haemoptysis, unresolved pneumonia,
      abscess formation, or empyema occurs in 830% often days or weeks later.
      Vomiting/regurgitation is often witnessed and pulmonary aspiration
      conﬁrmed by seeing gastric contents in the oropharynx or trachea during
      intubation or following suction. Gastric content is a mixture of semi-
      solid and liquid material—aspiration leads to a sudden onset of severe
      dypsnoea, wheeze, and cyanosis. Its acid nature causes severe damage
      to the alveolar-capillary membrane, with denaturation of pulmonary
      surfactant, i pulmonary permeability with oedema and atelectasis.
      Hydrocarbons (eg petrol, parafﬁn) cause severe pulmonary toxicity if
      aspiration occurs during ingestion or following regurgitation/vomiting.
      Investigations
      ABG
      These show hypoxaemia within minutes of acid aspiration. Initially, patients
      may hyperventilate with d pCO2 until pulmonary compliance i work of
      breathing sufﬁcient to result in hypoventilation.
      CXR
      Abnormalities develop in >90% of patients, but may take hours/days.
      Appearances depend on the nature of the aspirated material and the
      patient’s position at the time of the episode (right lower lobe is most
      frequently and severely affected, followed by left lower lobe and right middle
      lobe). In severe aspiration, diffuse bilateral inﬁltrates and pulmonary
      oedema similar to ARDS appearances are present. Less severe episodes
      produce atelectasis followed by alveolar inﬁltration.
      Intrapulmonary foreign body (including peanuts)
      Rarely radio-opaque. Resulting collapse, hyperinﬂation, or consolidation
      is usually obvious and depends on whether obstruction is complete or
      partial and if supervening infection is present. If the history strongly sug-
      gests an inhaled FB, but CXR is normal, consider an expiratory CXR,
      which may show evidence of air trapping distal to the obstruction.
                                              PULMONARY ASPIRATION              113

Prevention
Prevention is everything. Pay meticulous attention to airway protection.
This may involve positioning (tilt head down on the right hand side),
suction to the oropharynx (Yankauer catheter avoiding stimulation of the
gag reﬂex) and if necessary, tracheal intubation. Tracheal intubation does
not completely protect against aspiration of ﬂuid into the lungs, but it is
the best preventative measure. In at-risk patients, pass an NG tube to
empty the stomach. However, NG tubes can also predispose to aspiration
by preventing closure of the oesophageal sphincters and interfering with
coughing and clearing the pharynx.
Treatment
Correct hypoxia and give nebulized salbutamol for associated bronchospasm.
If particulate aspiration is present, refer for urgent bronchoscopy. Although
secondary infection is common, the use of antibiotics or steroids is not
routinely indicated.
114    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Spontaneous pneumothorax
      Primary spontaneous pneumothorax (PSP) may occur in previously
      healthy individuals. Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax (SSP) occurs
      in older patients with pre-existing chronic lung disease (like COPD or TB)
      and may also occur with asthma, bronchial carcinoma, Marfan’s syndrome,
      infection, cystic ﬁbrosis, and oesophageal rupture.
      Presentation
      Most patients present with unilateral pleuritic chest pain and dyspnoea.
      Classical physical signs may not be present (depending upon the size of
      the pneumothorax): tachypnoea, tachycardia, normal/hyper-resonant per-
      cussion note withed air entry on the affected side. Rarely, there may be a
      clicking sound at the cardiac apex.
      Severe symptoms (inability to speak, gasping, low SpO2) should prompt
      rapid assessment for tension pneumothorax: tracheal deviation,
      tachypnoea, tachycardia, and hypotension. Treat tension with immediate
      decompression using a needle in the second intercostal space (just above
      the third rib) in the mid-clavicular line (b p.328). Severe symptoms are
      also found in patients with SSP (disproportionate to the pneumothorax
      size). In the absence of signs of tension pneumothorax, obtain an
      emergency portable CXR and involve an experienced doctor.
      Investigation and treatment
      • Monitor pulse, SpO2, and BP. Ensure IV access.
      • Administer high ﬂow oxygen (aim SpO2 90–92% in patients with
        COPD).
      • When there are no signs of tension, an ABG will help assess patients
        with chronic lung disease, and guide oxygen therapy.
      Erect CXR
      • When using digital images, always use a picture archiving and communi-
        cation system (PACS) workstation. The signs of pneumothorax may be
        subtle and difﬁcult to spot.
      • Look for a displacement of the pleural line.
      • Do not mistake the scapular edge for the lung edge.
      • Some patients with COPD have emphysematous bullae, which can
        mimic pneumothorax. If in doubt, ask for senior review prior to treating
        for pneumothorax.
      • An air ﬂuid level at the costophrenic angle may be present.
      CT scan
      Can be of use in the sub-acute setting for assessing bullous lung disease in
      a stable patient. CT is not a primary diagnostic modality.
      Intervention
      • Should be guided primarily by the patient’s symptoms. If the patient is
        breathless, they should undergo an intervention.
      • The size of the pneumothorax can be estimated on CXR by measuring
        from the chest wall to the lung edge at the level of the hilum. This is
                                       SPONTANEOUS PNEUMOTHORAX                     115

  only an estimate and assumes symmetrical lung collapse. The cut-off of
  2cm is used to determine treatment.
• Intervention for PSP is needle aspiration. If unsuccessful, do not repeat
  aspiration. Instead insert a Seldinger chest drain.
• Treatment for symptomatic SSP is chest drain insertion and admission.
• Treatment for SSP without breathlessness is admission. Aspiration
  should be performed by an experienced doctor and may require CT.
• Always insert chest drains for bilateral pneumothoraces.
• Always insert a chest drain immediately following emergency needle
  decompression.
• Pleural aspiration and drain insertion should be performed by a doctor
  who has prior training and experience.
• Ensure the patient has IV access. Perform in a monitored environment
  with an assistant and appropriate supervision. Use aseptic technique.
• Always discuss the procedure with the patient and document that they
  have given their consent.
• If the patient is on anticoagulation or has a known coagulopathy dis-
  order, discuss with a haemotologist ﬁrst.
Aspiration technique
Conﬁrm the side of the pneumothorax. Sit the patient upright. Inﬁltrate 1%
lidocaine, then insert a 16G IV cannula just above the 3rd rib (in the 2nd
intercostal space) in the mid-clavicular line. Alternatively, lay the patient on
their side with the pneumothorax side upwards. Insert cannula in the 5th
intercostal space, in the anterior axillary line. Remove the needle, attach a
three-way tap, then aspirate air with a 50mL syringe. Continue aspiration
until the patient coughs excessively, or until 2.5L of air is removed.
Seldinger chest drain insertion
Conﬁrm the side of the pneumothorax. Keep the patient comfortable,
ensure adequate analgesia (this may require 1mg increments of morphine IV),
but avoid sedation. Sit the patient upright and rest their hand behind their
head. Inﬁltrate 10mL 1% lidocaine at the anterior axillary line in the 5th inter-
costal space. Aspirate a small amount of pleural air during inﬁltration and
note the depth of the pleural space. Locate the pleural space with the intro-
ducer needle (aspirate while advancing through chest wall), then advance the
guidewire through the needle. Remove the introducer needle, make a small
skin incision and gently pass the dilator over the guidewire using a twisting
action. Do not push the dilator more than 1cm past the depth of the pleural
space. Pass the chest drain over the guide wire to a depth of 10–12cm.
Remove the guide wire, connect to an underwater seal drain and suture in
pace. Check the drain is bubbling and swinging, and organize a CXR.
Discharge
Patients without breathlessness, with small PSP may be considered for
discharge. Give the patient verbal and written instructions to return if
their symptoms worsen and warn them not to ﬂy. Ensure they have an
appointment with a respiratory physician in the next week.
See http://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk
                                                                                                                                                                                             116
                                                                                             Spontaneous pneumothorax

                                                                                                                                                                                             CHAPTER 3 Medicine
                                                                                       If bilateral/haemodynamically unstable
                                                                                                proceed to chest drain

                                                                                              Age >50 and significant
                                                                       NO                        smoking history                           YES                     Secondary
                                    Primary
                                                                                              evidence of underlying
                                 pneumothorax                                                lung disease on exam or                                             pneumothorax
                                                                                                       CXR?

                                                                                                                                            YES
                                  Size >2 cm                             Aspirate                                                                                   >2 cm or
                                                              YES*                                                                                                  breathless
                                     and/or                          16–18G cannula
                                  breathless                          aspirate <2.5L

                                                                                                                                                                    NO
                                        NO

                                                                                                                                    Aspirate       YES
                                                                          Success                                                                                     Size
                                                                                                                                16–18G cannula
                                                                       (<2 cm and               NO                                                                   1–2 cm
                                                                                                                                 aspirate <2.5L
                                                                         breathing
                                                                        improved)
                                                     YES
                                                                                                                                                                          NO
                               Consider discharge                                                                                   Success
                                                                                                                  NO
                              review in OPD in 2–4                                                                                    size
                                      weeks                                                                                       now <1 cm

                                                                                                                                                  YES
                             *In some patients with a large                                         Chest drain
                             pneumothorax but minimal                                               Size 8–14Fr
                                                                                                       admit                                                           Admit
                             symptoms conservative                                                                                                      high flow oxygen (unless suspected
                             management may be                                                                                                                   oxygen sensitive)
                             appropriate                                                                                                                        observe for 24 hours

Fig. 3.23 Management of pneumothorax.1
1 Thorax 2010; 65(Suppl 2): ii18eii31. doi:10.1136/thx.2010.136986.
This page intentionally left blank
118    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Deep venous thrombosis
      DVT and PE are manifestations of the same disease process whereby
      abnormal clotting occurs in the veins of the legs or pelvis. The clots may
      break from the vein wall and embolize to the lungs. Untreated DVTs are
      associated with a 1–2% mortality from PE. Around half of those with DVT
      will go on to develop post-thrombotic syndrome, with lifelong pain and
      swelling of the leg.
      Risk factors
      • Recent surgery (where a general anaesthetic was administered, espe-
        cially orthopaedic, abdominal, spinal and obstetric).
      • Recent admission to hospital.
      • Current malignancy.
      • Being bedbound.
      • Sepsis.
      • IV drug use (where patient injects in the femoral vein).
      • Pregnancy/pelvic masses.
      • Immobility such as recent fracture with crutches and plaster cast.
      • Previous DVT/PE.
      • Thrombophilia or family history of venous thromboembolism.
      Clinical features
      DVT classically produces leg pain with swelling, warmth, tenderness, and
      dilated superﬁcial veins in the affected leg. These signs are non-speciﬁc
      and often not present. A small or partially occluding thrombus may be
      completely asymptomatic. History and clinical examination alone cannot
      safely exclude DVT—if a DVT is suspected, investigate further. Investigate
      for PE, rather than DVT if the patient has tachycardia, hypoxia, increased
      respiratory rate, or breathlessness (b Pulmonary embolus, p.120).
      Differential diagnosis
      • Muscular tear: typically acute onset.
      • Rupture of a Baker’s cyst: again, typically acute onset.
      • Cellulitis or other infection.
      Investigation and management
      • Record pulse rate, RR, BP, SpO2, and T° in all patients.
      • Take a full history including concurrent illness, past history, recent
        operations, travel, and family history.
      • Examine the affected leg for signs of plethora, deep vein tenderness,
        swelling (measure both legs, 10cm distal to tibial tuberosity), oedema
        and dilation of the skin veins.
      • Perform full examination checking for signs of PE or occult carcinoma.
      • Calculate the clinical probability assessment score. The Wells score
        (Table 3.5) is the most widely used clinical prediction score.
      • Take FBC, U&E, CRP, glucose.
      • Take D-dimer if Wells score indicates DVT is ‘unlikely’ (<3 points).
      • If D-dimer normal and DVT ‘unlikely’, DVT has been ruled out.
                                                        DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS                   119

 Table 3.5 Wells clinical probability assessment score for DVT
 Clinical feature                                                                        Score
 Active cancer (treatment within 6 months or palliative care)                            1
 Paralysis, paresis, or recent POP immobilization of a leg                               1
 Recently bedridden for >3 days or major surgery <12 weeks                               1
 Localized tenderness along the distribution of the deep venous system                   1
 Entire leg swelling                                                                     1
 Calf swelling >3cm compared with asymptomatic leg                                       1
 Pitting oedema (greater in the symptomatic leg)                                         1
 Dilated superﬁcial veins (non-varicose)                                                 1
 Previously documented DVT                                                               1
 Another diagnosis more likely than DVT                                                  -2
 Total score < 3 means DVT is ‘unlikely’. Score of 3 or more signiﬁes DVT is ‘likely’.

The Wells score was not developed with injecting drug users or pregnant
women, both of whom are at higher risk of DVT. These patients should
always undergo ultrasound scanning.
All patients investigated for DVT with a ‘likely’ Wells score (≥3) or an
elevated D-dimer level require ultrasound scanning. A normal whole leg
ultrasound scan (femoral, popliteal, and calf vein scan) will exclude DVT. If
a thigh scan is performed (the femoral and popliteal veins), DVT can only
be excluded by two normal thigh ultrasound scans, one week apart.
All patients with a ‘likely’ score should be anticoagulated with LMWH
while awaiting an outpatient ultrasound scan.
Patients diagnosed with calf or thigh DVT should be treated with
LMWH and discharged with a week’s supply, an appointment for the
anticoagulation services, and medical outpatient follow-up. Advise them
to return immediately if they become breathless or have chest pain.
Upper limb DVT
Seen almost exclusively in patients with in-dwelling central or long lines,
often for chemotherapy. May be associated with plethora and swelling of
the arm or face. If suspected, request an ultrasound of the arm and neck
veins, or a CT scan with contrast.
Superﬁcial thrombophlebitis
Patients present with a painful, tender area of skin. The diagnosis is made
clinically with a ﬁrm, tender superﬁcial vein, and overlying erythema. This
may co-exist with DVT and superﬁcial thrombus may propagate into
deep veins. If there is any doubt as to the presence of a DVT, investigate
using the DVT protocol. Otherwise, treat with NSAID. Arrange follow up
either in the ED, a medical clinic or with the GP.
120    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Pulmonary embolism
      The mortality of diagnosed and treated pulmonary embolism is 7%. Many
      more people die from undiagnosed PE. Venous thromboembolism develops
      in patients already suffering from sepsis, cancer, or COPD or in patients
      recovering from stroke, MI, surgery, and joint replacement. Pulmonary
      embolic disease can result in a variety of symptoms often misdiagnosed as
      asthma, anxiety, pneumonia and ACS.
      History
      Most patients with PE experience dyspnoea, commonly without other
      symptoms. Syncope with cyanosis, cardiac arrest or angina are signs
      of massive PE. A minority present with pleuritic chest pain, some with
      additional haemoptysis. Always consider PE in patients with unexplained
      hypoxia or breathlessness. Take a full history of concurrent illness, surgical
      procedures, recent hospital admission, past history including DVT and PE,
      travel and family history.
      Examination
      Examination may be normal.
      • Tachycardia and tachypnoea are common.
      • Pyrexia following lung infarction is common.
      • 30% of all patients with PE have normal SpO2.
      • Always record BP. Hypotension indicates massive PE.
      • Perform a full respiratory and cardiovascular examination.
      • Always examine the legs for signs of DVT.

       Table 3.6 Modiﬁed Wells clinical probability assessment score for PE
       Clinical feature                                                                   Score
       Signs of DVT (minimum of objective leg swelling and tenderness)                    3.0
       IV drug use                                                                        3.0
       PE is the most likely diagnosis                                                    3.0
       HR >100                                                                            1.5
       Prior PE or DVT diagnosis                                                          1.5
       Bed ridden for >3 days or surgery, within the past 4 weeks                         1.5
       Cancer (treated actively or with palliation within last 6 months)                  1.0
       Haemoptysis                                                                        1.0
       Total score <2.0 = low risk PE, 2.0–6.0 = moderate risk PE, >6.0 = high risk PE.

      Any patient scoring 2.0 or more on the Wells score, OR who has an
      elevated D-dimer, requires pulmonary imaging. Note that a normal
      D-dimer will not exclude PE in a patient with moderate or high probability
      of PE. Only a normal D-dimer and a low clinical probability will safely
      exclude PE.
                                                PULMONARY EMBOLISM             121

Investigations for suspected pulmonary embolus
• If hypoxic, tachycardic, or hypotensive, insert an IV cannula.
• All patients should have blood taken for FBC and U&Es.
• Take a D-dimer test on any patient who scores <2.0 on the Wells score
  (Table 3.6). Normal D-dimer in a patient scoring <2.0 excludes PE.
• Arrange ECG (to look for MI or pericarditis) and CXR (to look for
  pneumothorax, pneumonia). Many patients with PE have a normal ECG
  and CXR.
Diagnostic imaging for pulmonary embolus
There are two forms of imaging for PE: CT pulmonary angiography
(CTPA) and ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) scanning. CTPA uses a higher
dose of radiation (not good for young patients or pregnant patients), but
will give a deﬁnitive answer, as well as diagnose other conditions often
confused with PE (like aortic dissection).
V/Q scanning uses a low dose of radiation (good for the young and
pregnant), but may not give a deﬁnitive answer. V/Q scans are reported
as low, intermediate and high probability of PE. The V/Q scan probability
must concord with the clinical probability to diagnose or exclude PE (both
low probability or both high probability). All other combinations are
non-diagnostic and the patient must have a CTPA.
Pitfalls in diagnosis
• Investigating for PE because the patient has an elevated D-dimer. The
  D-dimer is irrelevant if there are no clinical symptoms or signs of PE.
• Deciding not to take the D-dimer because the patient is post-surgery,
  elderly, or has had recent trauma. If the Wells score is <2.0, a D-dimer
  test is rapid and may avoid admission for diagnostic imaging if normal.
Treatment of pulmonary embolus
Anticoagulate with LMWH and arrange to commence the patient on
warfarin therapy. If the patient is ambulant, not hypoxic with a normal
pulse rate and RR, many hospitals commence warfarin and follow-up as
an outpatient. Admit patients who are hypoxic, hypotensive, tachycardic,
tachypnoeic, or elderly for further management.
Suspected massive PE
• In patients with marked hypoxia and/or cardiovascular compromise, call
  for urgent ICU expert help.
• If available, an emergency echo will demonstrate a dilated right ventricle
  and right heart failure.
• Do not take unstable patients for a CT or V/Q.
• If suspicion of PE is high and the patient is haemodynamically unstable,
  administer thrombolytic therapy. Do not delay. Administer alteplase
  (rTPA) 100mg over 2 hr or 0.6mg/kg (max 50mg) over 15min as per
  European Cardiology guidelines (www.escardio.org).
122    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
      Causes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding
      Common
      • Peptic ulceration.
      • Mucosal inﬂammation (oesophagitis, gastritis, or duodenitis).
      • Oesophageal varices.
      • Mallory–Weiss tear.
      • Gastric carcinoma.
      • Coagulation disorders (thrombocytopenia, warfarin).
      Rare
      • Aorto-enteric ﬁstula (especially after aortic surgery).
      • Benign tumours (eg leiomyomas, carcinoid tumours, angiomas).
      • Congenital (eg Ehlers–Danlos, Osler–Weber–Rendu, pseudoxanthoma
        elasticum).
      History
      Take a detailed history, whilst resuscitating as necessary. Upper GI
      bleeding usually presents with haematemesis and/or melaena. Major upper
      GI bleeding may present with fresh PR bleeding.
      Ask about the amount and duration of bleeding, any past history of GI
      bleeding or liver problems, and associated symptoms (abdominal pain,
      weight loss, anorexia). Syncope usually infers a signiﬁcant bleed. Take a
      full drug history (ask about aspirin, NSAIDs, warfarin, iron) and enquire
      about alcohol consumption.
      Examination
      Check ABCs. Rapidly assess for evidence of hypovolaemic shock (pulse
      and respiratory rates, BP, GCS, skin colour/temperature, capillary reﬁll).
      Look at any available vomit or faeces. Check for abdominal masses,
      tenderness or surgical scars (including aortic grafting). Look for stigmata
      of liver disease. Perform a PR examination and check for faecal occult
      blood (FOB).
      Investigation and diagnosis
      Request old hospital notes and send blood for FBC, clotting screen, U&E,
      blood glucose, Group and Save or cross-matching (according to clinical
      features). Urea may be i, but creatinine will be normal unless renal
      function is impaired. Check SpO2 (obtain ABG if <94%) and consider CXR
      and ECG. Endoscopy is the investigation of choice to identify the source
      of the bleeding.
      Risk of further bleeding and death
      The risk of mortality and further complications increases with increasing age,
      co-morbidities (especially cancer and heart failure), liver disease, continued
      bleeding, elevated urea, and passage of PR blood.
                                          UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING               123

Table 3.7 Initial Rockall Score for risk of death in upper GI bleeding
Points           0                    1              2                  3
Age              <60                  60–79          >80
Shock            HR<100               HR>100         Systolic
                                                     BP<100mmHg
                 Systolic             Systolic
                 BP>100mmHg           BP>100mmHg
 Comorbidity                                         Cardiac failure,   Renal failure
                                                     ischaemic heart
                                                                        Liver failure
                                                     disease or
                                                     any major          Disseminated
                                                     co-morbidity       malignancy
Any score >0 signiﬁes increased risk of mortality.

Only consider patients scoring 0 on the initial Rockall score (Table 3.7),
with no further evidence of bleeding, for discharge home from the ED
with follow-up. Any patient scoring >0 requires urgent endoscopy.
Treatment of moderate/severe haemorrhage
• Check airway and breathing. Provide O2 to maintain SpO2 94–98%.
  Insert 2 large (14G) IV cannulae, send FBC, U&E, clotting, cross-match.
• Start IV ﬂuids followed by blood as necessary.
• Avoid omeprazole acutely unless the patient has known peptic ulcer
  disease (give 40mg diluted in 100mL saline as IVI over 30min).
• If the patient is anticoagulated, or has a clotting disorder (eg due to
  liver disease), discuss with a haematologist and give vitamin K/clotting
  factors/fresh frozen plasma (FFP) accordingly.
• Insert a urinary catheter and monitor the urine output.
• Ensure that patients with severe uncontrolled variceal bleeding, severe
  encephalopathy, hypoxia, acute agitation, or evidence of aspiration have
  their airways secured, if necessary by tracheal intubation.
Managing severe haemorrhage possibly due to varices
For unstable patients with a past history of varices or clinical features of
hepatic failure, arrange emergency endoscopic treatment:
• Commence ﬂuid rescucitation.
• Give terlipressin (2mg IV repeated every 4–6hr).
• Check International Normalized Ratio (INR) and give IV vitamin K if
  prolonged.
• Give prophylactic antibiotics eg ciproﬂoxacin or second/third generation
  cephalosporin which may d mortality in severe haemorrhage.
• Consider ballon tamponade as a salvage procedure in a patient with
  massive haemorrhage, at risk of death. If experienced in the technique,
  insert a 4 lumen Sengstaken/Minnesota tube. Inﬂate the gastric balloon
  then the oesophageal balloon to a pressure of 30–40mmHg in order to
  tamponade the bleeding varices. Regularly aspirate both ports.
See http://www.sign.ac.uk
124    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Lower gastrointestinal bleeding
      The commonest cause of apparent lower GI bleeding is upper GI haem-
      orrhage. 820% of acute GI haemorrhage is from the colon or rectum.
      Angiodysplasia and bleeding from diverticulae are the most frequent
      causes, but inﬂammatory bowel disease or, very rarely, aorto-enteric ﬁstulae
      may be responsible. Lower GI haemorrhage often settles spontaneously:
      localization of the bleeding source may be difﬁcult.
      History
      Nature of bleeding Melaena may occur following small bowel or proximal
      colon bleeding, as well as upper GI haemorrhage. Conversely, large
      volumes of fresh or ‘plum-coloured’ rectal bleeding may follow upper GI
      haemorrhage. Bloody diarrhoea suggests inﬂammatory bowel disease or
      infective colitis.
      Associated symptoms Weight loss, anorexia, or a change in bowel habit
      raise suspicion of colonic carcinoma. Abdominal pain may be a feature
      of ischaemic colitis, inﬂammatory bowel disease, or carcinoma. Anal pain
      commonly occurs with anal ﬁssure or complication of haemorrhoids.
      Syncope or postural dizziness May indicate signiﬁcant haemorrhage.
      Past medical history Ask about inﬂammatory bowel disease, peptic
      ulceration, or other illnesses. Previous aortic surgery with graft insertion
      can rarely result in formation of an aorto-enteric ﬁstula (symptoms
      include sporadic or fulminant bleeding, often with syncope).
      Drug history Ask about salicylates, NSAIDs, corticosteroids, and
      anticoagulants.
      Family and social history Note any family history of peptic ulcers,
      inﬂammatory bowel disease. Enquire about alcohol consumption.
      Examination
      First assess for signs of hypovolaemia and commence resuscitation if nec-
      essary. Document pulse, BP (comparing erect and supine, noting any pos-
      tural drop), T° and SpO2. Examine the abdomen and PR in all cases.
      Investigations
      Obtain blood for cross-matching (ask for 4–6U of type speciﬁc if urgent),
      FBC, U&E, glucose, and coagulation studies. Perform an ECG on any
      patient >50 years.
      Risk of further bleeding and death
      The risk of mortality and further complications increases with increasing
      age, co-morbidities, haemodynamic disturbance, and the use of NSAIDs or
      aspirin. Only consider discharge if the patient is young, otherwise healthy,
      has passed only a small amount of blood PR, and does not take NSAIDs
      or anticoagulants. Always arrange follow up for these patients.
                             LOWER GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING               125

Treatment
Patients with signs of hypovolaemia require immediate resuscitation:
• Give O2.
• Attach monitoring (cardiac monitor, SpO2, BP monitoring).
• Insert two large bore IV cannulae.
• Give 1L of 0.9% saline or Hartmann’s solution IV stat and give further
  ﬂuids according to response.
• Insert a NG tube.
• Insert a urinary catheter.
• Correct any coagulopathy.
• Consider the need for a central venous line.
• Contact the surgical team and ICU.
See http://www.sign.ac.uk
126    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Headache
      Headaches of non-traumatic origin account for 80.5% of ED attendances;
      10–15% have serious underlying pathology. Patients typically present in
      one of three ways:
      • Severe headache, unlike any previous one (‘ﬁrst severe’ or ‘worst
        ever’).
      • Headache with associated worrying features (altered mental status,
        fever, focal neurology).
      • Chronic severe headache unresponsive to treatment.
      Causes
      Primary headaches
      • Migraine.
      • Tension headaches.
      • Cluster headaches.
      • Miscellaneous (benign cough headache, benign exertional headache,
        headache associated with sexual activity).
      Secondary headaches
      • Head injury.
      • Vascular (stroke, intracranial haematoma, subarachnoid haemorrhage,
        unruptured arterio-venous malformation, venous thrombosis, hyper-
        tension).
      • Non-vascular intracranial disorder (i cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) pres-
        sure, post-LP, intracranial tumour).
      • Substance misuse or withdrawal (including analgesia withdrawal or
        rebound).
      • Infection (encephalitis or meningitis).
      • Metabolic (hypoxia, hypercapnoea, hypoglycaemia, carbon monoxide
        (CO) poisoning, dialysis).
      • Craniofacial disorder (pathology of skull, neck, eyes, nose, ears, sinuses,
        teeth, mouth, temporomandibular joint dysfunction).
      • Neuralgias (trigeminal, occipital and other cranial nerves).
      Approach
      Use a detailed history and examination (including vital signs and neurolog-
      ical examination) to search for potentially serious causes. Look particularly
      for the following (some typical features in brackets):
      • Subarachnoid haemorrhage (sudden, severe onset, syncope)—
         b p.128.
      • Meningitis or encephalitis (fever, neck rigidity)—b p.224.
      • Head injury (history or signs of trauma)—b p.354.
      • i intracranial pressure (papilloedema, loss of retinal vein pulsation).
      • Stroke (focal neurological signs)—b p.144.
      • Acute glaucoma (painful red eye, d VA, irregular semi-dilated pupil)—
         b p.542.
      • Cranial arteritis (jaw pain, temporal artery tenderness)—b p.132.
                                                          HEADACHE         127

History
Features suggesting possible serious pathology are:
• Sudden onset headache.
• Worst headache ever.
• Dramatic change in pattern of headache.
• Known HIV or malignancy.
• The presence of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt.
• Headache coming on during exertion.
• New onset headache in those aged >50 years.
Ask about drugs and the possibility of toxins (eg CO).
Examination
Check GCS, pulse rate, respiratory rate, BP, T° and SpO2:
• Feel the head for muscular tenderness, arterial tenderness, trigger
  points for neuralgia, and look for evidence of head injury.
• Examine the eyes for VA, pupil reactions, eye movements. Look at the
  fundi for papilloedema.
• Palpate the sinuses for tenderness.
• Look in the ears for haemotympanum or infection.
• Check the oral cavity for infection.
• Look for evidence of purpura/rash of meningococcal infection.
• Complete a full neurological examination (include cranial nerves, limb
  tone, power, sensation, co-ordination and reﬂexes).
Check for Kernig’s sign: straightening the knee whilst the hip is ﬂexed
produces discomfort in the presence of meningeal irritation.
Management
Investigation and emergency treatment will be tailored according to the
presentation of the patient, based upon the likely diagnosis.
• Check FBC, ESR, CRP, U&E, blood glucose.
• If pyrexial and no other obvious source of infection found, take blood
  cultures and consider IV cefotaxime 2g. Start IV ﬂuids and admit.
• Give paracetamol (oral or IV if vomiting) and an NSAID.
• An effective treatment for headache is IV metoclopramide 10mg with IV
  ﬂuids.
• Arrange an emergency CT brain for any patient with an acute severe
  headache, or with a history of seizure, or an abnormal neurological
  exam. Arrange a CT for any patient with HIV.
• If subarachnoid haemorrhage is suspected and CT normal, admit for
  lumbar puncture.
It may be safe to discharge home a patient with slow onset headache that
has resolved following treatment, with normal examination and blood
tests. Arrange GP follow up. Always advise to reattend if symptoms
worsen.
128    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Subarachnoid haemorrhage
         Consider subarachnoid haemorrhage in any ‘worst ever’
                       or sudden onset headache
      Atraumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage can occur at any age and is an
      important cause of sudden collapse and death. Most bleeds follow rupture
      of saccular (‘berry’) aneurysms in the circle of Willis. Other bleeds may
      be due to arteriovenous malformations, tumours, or connective tissue
      disorders.
      History
      Up to 70% of patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage report rapid onset
      or ‘worst ever’ headache. This is classically described as ‘like a blow to the
      back of the head’, accompanied by neck pain, photophobia, and vomiting.
      In 25%, exertional activities precede the event. The patient may present
      after syncope or ﬁts. Drowsiness and confusion are common. ‘Warning
      headaches’ may precede subarachnoid haemorrhage. Unilateral eye pain
      may occur.
      Examination
      Document pulse rate, BP, To, and GCS. An unconscious patient with signs
      of Cushing’s response signiﬁes i intracranial pressure. Perform full cranial
      and peripheral nerve examination. There may be focal motor and sensory
      signs due to intracerebral extension of the haemorrhage or vasospasm,
      subhyaloid haemorrhages (blotchy haemorrhages seen in the fundi) or
      cranial nerve palsies. Oculomotor nerve palsy is characteristic of a berry
      aneurysm involving the posterior communicating artery. Neck stiffness is
      often absent in ED presentations, either because meningeal irritation has
      not yet occurred or because the patient is deeply unconscious.
      Investigation
      This may need to proceed alongside resuscitation in seriously ill patients:
      • Assess airway and breathing. If the patient is unconscious, open the
        airway and contact ICU. Consider urgent RSI, tracheal intubation and
        ventilation.
      • Obtain venous access and check BMG, FBC, clotting screen, U&E.
      • CXR may show changes of neurogenic pulmonary oedema.
      • ECG may demonstrate ischaemic changes.
      • Arrange emergency CT scan for all suspected cases (maximally sensitive
        within 12hr). Admit for lumbar puncture (LP) (done >12hr after head-
        ache onset) even if CT scan is normal.
      • Involve the neurosurgical team early. It may be useful to use the Hunt
        and Hess score (see Table 3.8) when communicating severity by phone.
                                        SUBARACHNOID HAEMORRHAGE               129

Table 3.8 Hunt and Hess scale for subarachnoid haemorrahage
Grade
1        Asymptomatic, mild headache, slight nuchal rigidity
2        Moderate to severe headache, nuchal rigidity, no neurologic deﬁcit
         other than cranial nerve palsy
3        Drowsiness/confusion, mild focal neurological deﬁcit
4        Stupor, moderate-severe hemiparesis
5        Coma, decerebrate posturing

Treatment
Tailor this according to the presentation and the need for resuscitation:
• Maintain SpO2 94–98%.
• Provide adequate analgesia and antiemetic. Codeine (30–60mg PO),
  paracetamol (1g PO) and/or NSAID may sufﬁce. Some patients require
  more potent analgesics (eg morphine titrated in 1mg increments IV
  according to response)—proceed slowly to avoid drowsiness.
• If unconscious (GCS < 8), severely agitated or combative, tracheal intu-
  bation (with general anaesthetic (GA)) will allow IPPV and control of
  pCO2 to within normal levels. Insert a urinary catheter and arterial line.
Contact neurosurgical team—further treatment options include:
• Nimodipine (60mg PO every 4hr or 1mg/hr IVI) to prevent and treat
  ischaemic neurological deﬁcits secondary to vasospasm.
• Mannitol IV (eg 200mL of 10%) if there is evidence of i ICP.
130    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Migraine
      Patients with recurrent migraine rarely attend the ED unless symptoms
      are different from usual—take care to avoid missing more serious condi-
      tions. The pathogenesis of migraine is not entirely clear, but there is initial
      vasoconstriction and subsequent vasodilatation of both intracranial and
      extracranial blood vessels.
      Presentation
      Precipitants include fatigue, alcohol, menstruation, oral contraceptive pill
      (OCP), hunger, chocolate, cheese, shellﬁsh, and red wine.
      A prodrome lasting 5–30min occurs in a third of patients, with blurred
      vision, photophobia, or scintillating scotomata (an area of blurred or
      absent vision surrounded by moving zig-zag lines), malaise, anorexia, and
      vomiting. A few experience hemiparaesthesiae, mild unilateral weakness,
      ataxia, or dysphasia. The following headache may last 4–72hr, and is
      usually ‘throbbing’ and unilateral, but may be generalized. Photophobia,
      nausea, or phonophobia is common.
      Rare forms of migraine
      Hemiplegic migraine Profound hemiplegia precedes the development of
      the headache by 30–60min. The weakness and other focal deﬁcits usually
      resolve quickly. Occasionally, they may be slow or fail to resolve.
      Basilar migraine Brainstem disturbances, with impaired consciousness,
      vertigo, dysarthria, diplopia, and limb weakness.
      Ophthalmoplegic migraine Transient unilateral ophthalmoplegia and
      ptosis, which may last several days.
      Acephalgic migraine Very occasionally, neurological defects may be
      present without headache.
      Examination
      Look for evidence of other serious diagnoses.
      Treatment of acute attacks
      • Give simple analgesia (eg paracetamol 1g PO PRN qds or NSAID) in
        combination with an anti-emetic (eg metoclopramide 10mg PO, or IV).
      • Refer for admission patients who have neurological signs, altered mental
        status, or where there is diagnostic uncertainty (including change in
        severe headache pattern).
      • Acute attacks that fail to respond to simple measures may respond to
        other drugs, but these are associated with signiﬁcant adverse effects.
        5HT1 agonist sumatriptan (6mg SC or 50mg PO or 20mg intranasally) is
        effective, but discuss with a senior ﬁrst.
      Sumatriptan causes vasoconstriction and is therefore contraindicated
      in IHD, uncontrolled hypertension, basilar, and hemiplegic migraine.
      Rebound headache may occur in up to 45%.
      Ergotamine is best avoided (see BNF). It causes nausea, vomiting,
      abdominal pain, and muscular cramps. It is contraindicated in peripheral
      vascular disease, IHD, pregnancy, breast feeding, hemiplegic migraine,
      Raynaud’s disease, liver and renal impairment, and hypertension.
This page intentionally left blank
132    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Other causes of headache
      Cluster headache
      These are more common in men. Often there is a family history. Headache
      usually occurs at night, waking the patient. Sometimes alcohol may act as a
      precipitant. Headaches are typically ‘clustered’ into up to eight attacks per
      day each lasting between 15 and 180min. Pain is usually severe, centred
      upon the eye. Associated symptoms, often unilateral, include conjunctival
      injection, lacrimation, nasal congestion, rhinorrhoea, forehead, and facial
      sweating, miosis, ptosis.
      Treatment High ﬂow O2 (12L/min via reservoir mask) for 15min
      sometimes provides relief. Otherwise, use paracetamol/NSAID. Consult
      before contemplating starting ergotamine or sumatriptan.
      Trigeminal neuralgia
      Characterized by stabbing unilateral pain within the distribution of the
      trigeminal nerves. Stimulation of the ‘trigger area’ (eg by touching, hair
      brushing, or even chewing) induces very severe pain. Treat with car-
      bamezepine and oral analgesia. Admit if the pain is severe and unrelieved.
      Tension headache
      The diagnosis is only made after exclusion of more serious pathology.
      The history may be described in a dramatic manner. The headache is
      usually continuous, pressing, or tight (‘band-like’) in nature. It is usually
      bitemporal or occipital. Usual features of migraine are absent and the
      headache does not worsen with exertion.
      Examination often reveals pericranial muscle tenderness, but is otherwise
      normal.
      Treat with simple analgesia (eg paracetamol 1g PO qds PRN) and
      advise GP follow-up. Reassure the patient that a thorough history and
      examination have not revealed any worrying features.
      Cranial (‘temporal’ or ‘giant cell’) arteritis (see b p.541)
      Consider this in all patients >50 years with recent onset of headache or
      change in headache pattern. There may be weight loss, night sweats, low
      grade fever, jaw claudication, anded vision (up to 10% present with acute
      visual loss), shoulder girdle stiffness, and muscular aches (polymyalgia).
      Involvement of carotid or vertebral arteries may lead to TIAs or stroke.
      Examination: the temporal arteries may be tender, reddened, pulseless,
      or thickened. Fundoscopy is usually normal, but papilloedema can occur
      later in the disease.
      Investigation: i ESR >> 40mm/hr, often with a low grade anaemia and
      leucocytosis. A normal ESR does not exclude temporal arteritis.
      Treatment: in view of the serious risk of rapidly progressive visual loss,
      if suspected give 200mg IV hydrocortisone (or 40mg prednisolone
      PO) immediately. Refer to the neurologist or ophthalmologist as an
      emergency—the diagnosis may be conﬁrmed by temporal artery biopsy.
                                       OTHER CAUSES OF HEADACHE               133

Space-occupying lesions
If the headache is always located on the same side, consider space
occupying lesions and arteriovenous malformations. Headaches that are
dull, aching, and made worse by lying down or straining are typical of
space occupying lesions.
Malignant hypertension
Hypertension is an unusual cause of headaches, but is seen in patients with
malignant hypertension and diastolic BP > 130mmHg (b p.90).
Ventricular shunts
Assume that any patient who presents with headaches associated with
a ventricular shunt has infection/blockage and refer as an emergency.
Associated drowsiness is a particular pointer to blockage.
Analgesic headache
Chronic use of simple analgesics, sympathomimetics, ergotamine,
or cocaine is associated with headaches. Stopping or starting certain
medications (eg OCP) can also cause headache, as can withdrawal from
caffeine. Exclude serious causes and advise GP follow-up with advice on
medication use.
Cerebral venous thrombosis
This is more common than was previously realized. It presents in similar
fashion to subarachnoid or subdural haemorrhage: sudden onset head-
ache with nausea and vomiting. It may be associated with sinus infections,
pregnancy and the post-partum period. The diagnosis may be missed on
CT, but a clue includes i ICP at LP.
Meningitis (see b p.224)
Encephalitis
Miscellaneous causes
Headaches may also result from:
• Hypoxia and hypercapnoea.
• Poisons: eg CO and solvents (b p.208).
• Drugs: eg nitrates, sildenaﬁl.
• Post-traumatic (b p.368).
134    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Acute confusional state (delirium)
      Deﬁnition of delirium
      Delirium is a form of organic brain syndrome characterized by:
      • Disturbed conscious level and mood (overactivity, excitement, drowsi-
        ness or stupor).
      • Global disturbance of cognition (memory, orientation, attention,
        speech, motor function).
      • Rapid onset with ﬂuctuating course (often worse at night, with reversal
        of usual sleep–wake cycle) and brief duration.
      • Perceptual distortions and hallucinations (especially visual).
      Causes of acute confusion
      One or more of the following may be the underlying cause of an acute
      confusional state (several causes frequently co-exist):
      • Prescribed medication: digoxin, cimetidine, steroids, analgesics, diuretics,
        anticholinergics, antiparkinsonian drugs.
      • Drugs of abuse: opioids, benzodiazepines, ecstasy, amphetamines, hal-
        lucinogens.
      • Withdrawal: from alcohol, opioids, hypnotics or anxiolytics.
      • Infection: pneumonia, UTI, septicaemia, meningitis, encephalitis.
      • Metabolic: hypoxia, hypercapnia, hypoglycaemia, acidosis, hyponat-
        raemia, hypercalcaemia.
      • Cardiac: acute MI, cardiac failure, endocarditis.
      • Neurological: head injury, chronic subdural haematoma, meningitis, post-
        ictal state.
      • Organ failure: respiratory, renal and hepatic failure.
      • Endocrine: myxoedema, thyrotoxicosis, diabetes, Addison’s disease.
      Differential diagnosis
      Delirium can occur at any age, but is much more common in the elderly.
      It is often misdiagnosed as schizophrenia, depression, or dementia (see
      opposite). Differentiation can be difﬁcult, but the following are more
      suggestive of physical illness:
      • Non-auditory hallucinations.
      • Dysarthria.
      • Ataxia.
      • Gait disturbance.
      • Incontinence.
      • Focal neurological signs.
      Approach
      Search systematically for (and exclude) the physical causes of acute confu-
      sion outlined above.
                                                                DEMENTIA         135

Investigation of acute confusion
Perform a thorough, careful physical and mental state examination (see
b Mental state examination, p.606) on acutely confused patients. It may
be impossible to obtain an accurate history from the patient, so actively
seek other sources of information: relatives, carers, GP, and previous
medical records.
Look carefully for evidence of alcohol/drug intoxication or evidence of
withdrawal states. Examine for focal neurological signs and signs of acute
cardiac, respiratory, or abdominal abnormalities (including acute urinary
retention). Document basic vital signs (GCS, pulse, BP, respiratory rate
and T*) in all cases.
Mandatory basic investigations
• BMG.
• U&E, FBC, and blood glucose.
• Urinalysis.
• SpO2 and ABG.
• ECG.
• CXR.
Adopt a low threshold for additional investigations based on clinical
suspicion—blood cultures, serum paracetamol and salicylate, CT brain
scan, and even LP may be indicated.
Be careful not to miss: hypoglycaemia, head injury, Wernicke’s encephalopathy,
opioid intoxication, acute alcohol withdrawal, CO poisoning.

Dementia
Dementia is an acquired, progressive decline in intellect, behaviour, and
personality. It is irreversible and typically occurs with a normal level of
consciousness. Note that patients with dementia are at risk of delirium
resulting from an acute infective or metabolic origin—a clue to this may
be an acute deterioration in mental state.
The commonest causes of dementia are Alzheimer’s disease, vascular
dementia, and Lewy body dementia.
136    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      The unconscious patient: 1
      Common causes                    Uncommon causes
      • Hypoglycaemia                  • Type 2 respiratory failure
      • Drug overdose                  • Cardiac failure
      • Head injury                    • Arrhythmias
      • Stroke                         • Hypovolaemic shock
      • Subarachnoid haemorrhage       • Anaphylaxis
      • Convulsions                    • Hepatic/renal failure
      • Alcohol intoxication           • Hypothermia/hyperthermia
                                       • Meningitis/encephalitis
                                       • Malaria
                                       • DKA/HHS
                                       • Non-convulsive status epilepticus
                                       • Wernicke’s encephalopathy

      Treatment may be needed before any diagnosis is made. Remember:
      • Airway.
      • Breathing.
      • Circulation.
      Initial resuscitation
      Airway and cervical spine Whatever the cause of coma, a patient may die
      or suffer brain damage due to airway obstruction, respiratory depression.
      or circulatory failure. Clear and protect the airway immediately, and
      immobilize the cervical spine if trauma is suspected.
      Breathing If breathing appears inadequate ventilate with O2 using a self-
      inﬂating bag with an O2 reservoir. An uninjured patient who seems to be
      breathing adequately can be examined supine, but nurse him/her in the
      recovery position toed risk of airway obstruction. Record RR.
      Circulation Measure pulse and BP. Observe and feel the skin for colour,
      sweating and T°. Obtain reliable venous access. Monitor ECG. Replace IV
      ﬂuid if indicated.
      Conscious level Assess level of consciousness using GCS (b Head injury:
      examination, p.360). Check the blood glucose (initially by BMG) and treat
      hypoglycaemia immediately (b p.150). Record pupil size. Give slow IV
      thiamine (ie 2 pairs of Pabrinex® ampoules in 100mL 5% glucose over
      30min—see BNF ) to patients with a history of alcoholism or who appear
      malnourished.
                                       THE UNCONSCIOUS PATIENT: 1               137

History
Obtain a history from the ambulance crew and the patient’s relatives and
friends. Ask:
• How was the patient found?
• When was he/she last seen?
• Is there any suggestion of trauma?
• Is there any history of ﬁts?
• Has there been recent foreign travel?
• Previous symptoms and medical history (including depression).
• Note any drugs available.
Check previous ED records and hospital notes.
Examination
Examine thoroughly for illness and injury. Check clothes and possessions
for tablets and cards/bracelets warning of pre-existing disease.
i Respiratory rate may reﬂect obstructed airway, aspiration, pneumonia,
DKA, liver/renal failure, salicylate poisoning, methanol, or ethylene glycol.
Respiratory depression may be due to poisoning (eg barbiturates, opioids,
tricyclics) or i ICP. Brainstem compression or damage by stroke may
cause rapid, irregular or intermittent (Cheyne–Stokes) breathing.
If bradycardic consider: hypoxia, complete heart block, i ICP, digoxin or
B-blocker poisoning (b p.198).
If tachycardic consider: airway obstruction, hypoxia, hypovolaemia, SVT,
VT, or anticholinergic overdose.
AF may be associated with cerebral emboli.
Hypotension suggests hypoxia, shock (hypovolaemic, anaphylactic, septic),
or poisoning.
Hypertension may be due to i ICP.
Skin: look for pallor, cyanosis, jaundice, spider naevi, skin crease/scar
pigmentation (Addison’s disease), rashes (eg purpura in meningococcal
infection or DIC), injection marks (drug addiction or medical treatment),
and signs of trauma. Erythema or blistering over pressure points indicate
the patient has been unconscious for some hours.
Measure rectal T° with a low-reading thermometer if the skin feels cold.
Coma is common at <30°C (b Hypothermia: presentation, p.254).
138    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      The unconscious patient: 2
      Neurological examination include GCS, limb strength, muscle tone and
      reﬂexes, optic fundi, ear drums, neck stiffness (except in neck injury), and
      palpation of the fontanelle in babies. Lateralizing signs, such as facial or
      limb weakness, may be caused by a stroke, intracranial bleeding or pre-
      existing problems (eg previous stroke or Bell’s palsy). Ocular nerve palsy
      or divergent squint with coma can indicate Wernicke’s encephalopathy,
      requiring IV thiamine or tricyclic poisoning. Look for subtle signs of
      seizure activity (eg twitching of ocular muscles or eyelids, unusual limb
      movements), which may indicate non-convulsive status epilepticus. Look
      at the fundi—spontaneous central retinal venous pulsations are rare with
      i ICP. Subhyaloid haemorrhages (blotchy fundal haemorrhages) suggest
      subarachnoid haemorrhage.
      Hypoglycaemia can cause localized weakness/coma and mimic stroke.
      Coma without lateralizing signs is usually due to poisoning, a post-ictal
      state, brainstem stroke, or hepatic failure: extensor plantar reﬂexes are
      common in these conditions.
      Tricyclic antidepressants often cause coma with dilated pupils, a divergent
      squint, i muscle tone, jerky limb movements, and extensor plantars.
      In severe poisoning, there may be muscle ﬂaccidity with respiratory
      depression anded reﬂexes (b p.194).
      Coma with small pupils and respiratory depression suggests opioid
      poisoning (b p.188). In unexplained coma, give a therapeutic trial
      of naloxone (0.4–0.8mg IV), observing for changes in conscious level,
      respiratory rate, and pupil size.
      Investigations
      • BMG and blood glucose. If BMG is low, do not wait for the laboratory
        result to conﬁrm this before starting treatment.
      • ABG (record FiO2 and whether breathing spontaneously or IPPV).
      • FBC, prothrombin time, U&E.
      • Check paracetamol and salicylate levels if poisoning is suspected: para-
        cetamol alone does not cause coma (except in late cases with liver
        failure), but a mixture of drugs may have been taken. Drug screening for
        sedatives/hypnotics is not needed, but in unexplained coma keep blood
        for later analysis if necessary.
      • ECG may show arrhythmias (b Tricyclic antidepressant poisoning,
        p.194).
      • CXR may show pneumonia, aspiration, trauma, or tumour.
      • CT scan may be needed to diagnose subarachnoid haemorrhage, stroke,
        or head injury.
      Psychogenic coma
      Patients sometimes pretend to be unconscious. It can be difﬁcult to be
      certain of this—exclude other causes ﬁrst. Suspect psychogenic coma if
      serious pathology has been excluded and when the eyes are opened, only
      the sclera show as the eyes deviate upwards (Bell’s phenomenon).
This page intentionally left blank
140    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Collapse and syncope
      Syncope is a sudden, transient loss of consciousness, with spontaneous
      recovery.
      Priorities
      • Identify serious or life-threatening problems and institute treatment.
      • Decide which patients require admission.
      • Decide which patients require follow-up.
      History of syncopal episode
      Was it a simple faint? Vasovagal or neurally-mediated syncope is a
      common response to an overwarm environment or prolonged standing,
      and can be precipitated by sudden fright or visual stimuli (eg the sight
      of blood). Other contributors are large meals, prolonged starvation
      or alcohol. There are usually premonitory symptoms of feeling unwell,
      nauseated, dizzy, or tired, with yawning, blurred or ‘tunnel’ vision, or
      altered hearing. If the fainter cannot get supine (eg bystanders keeping
      them upright), seizure-like twitching may occur (convulsive syncope).
      Vomiting and incontinence may occur and do not reliably discriminate
      seizures from faints.
      Was it a seizure? Look at the ambulance records. An eyewitness account
      is crucial. Ask what the witnesses actually saw (do not assume they know
      what a ‘ﬁt’ looks like). There should typically be no prodrome, there is
      often a cry followed by tonic/clonic movements. Cyanosis, saliva frothing
      from the mouth, heavy breathing, tongue biting, or incontinence suggest
      a generalized seizure. Post-ictal drowsiness or confusion is normal—very
      rapid recovery questions the diagnosis.
      Was it a cardiac event? Cardiac syncopal events are also abrupt in
      onset (eg collapse due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) and may be
      accompanied by pallor and sweating. Recovery may be rapid with ﬂushing
      and deep/sighing respiration in some cases (eg Stokes–Adams attacks).
      Nausea and vomiting are not usually associated with syncope from
      arrhythmias. Ask about previous episodes and chest pain, palpitations,
      history of cardiac disease, and family history of sudden death. Syncope
      associated with exertion is a worrying feature: possible causes include
      aortic or mitral stenosis, pulmonary hypertension, cardiomyopathy, or
      coronary artery disease.
      Other causes Carotid sinus syncope is neurally mediated, and often occurs
      with shaving or turning the head. Syncope may be secondary to effects of
      medication (eg GTN, B-blockers, anti-hypertensive drugs). Syncope may
      also be the presenting feature of subarachnoid haemorrhage, ruptured
      ectopic pregnancy, aortic or carotid dissection, PE, or GI bleed. Syncope
      is rarely caused by a TIA.
                                             COLLAPSE AND SYNCOPE             141

Assessment and treatment
If a patient suddenly loses consciousness in the ED, assess responsiveness
and check for a pulse. Keep the airway clear, give O2, and monitor pulse
and ECG. Note any neurological signs during the episode and obtain BP,
SpO2, and BMG.
Patients seen following syncope Obtain a detailed account from the patient
and witnesses. Look for signs of tongue biting, incontinence, or other
injuries, examine the CVS for murmurs, arrhythmias or abnormalities.
Perform a neurological examination and look for focal signs. Do postural
tests (supine and standing or sitting pulse and BP). A degree of postural
hypotension is common, but postural symptoms (eg dizziness, weakness,
etc.) are always signiﬁcant (look for causes of hypovolaemia eg GI bleed,
ectopic pregnancy). Check BMG to exclude hypoglycaemia and an ECG
looking for arrhythmias, LVH, ischaemia, previous or acute MI, and QT
prolongation. An abnormal ECG may be the only clue to an underlying
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) or Brugada syndrome.
Disposal
Admit patients for cardiology review within 24 hr if they present with:
• An ECG abnormality.
• Heart failure.
• Loss of consciousness on exertion.
• Family history of sudden death <40 year or inherited cardiac condition.
• Age >65 year with no prodromal symptoms.
• A heart murmur.
Refer patients for assessment by a specialist in epilepsy if they present
with one or more of:
• A bitten tongue.
• Amnesia, unresponsiveness, unusual posturing, or prolonged limb
  jerking, head turning to one side.
• History of a prodrome.
• Post-ictal confusion.
It may be appropriate to discharge patients with full recovery, appropriate
history for vasovagal syncope and a normal examination.
See www.nice.org.uk
Diagnoses not to be missed
• GI bleed: syncope (± postural symptoms) indicate signiﬁcant blood
  loss and hypovolaemia. Perform PR examination to check for blood/
  melaena.
• Ectopic pregnancy: suspect this in women with syncope and abdominal
  pain or gynaecological symptoms. Do a pregnancy test.
• Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm.
• PE (b Pulmonary embolism, p.120). A witness may give a history of
  cyanosis. Indicative of massive thrombus.
142    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Acute generalized weakness
      Weakness may be a feature of common neurological problems (eg TIA/
      stroke), or accompany many of the causes of collapse (see b Collapse
      and syncope, p.140). Less commonly, generalized muscle weakness may
      be the presentation of a number of other diseases.
      Guillain–Barré syndrome
      Guillain–Barré follows a respiratory or GI viral infection and is character-
      ized by progressive symmetrical weakness, spreading from distal muscles
      to involve proximal muscles. Symptoms and signs include muscle tender-
      ness, back pain, loss of muscle reﬂexes, sensory symptoms (paraesthesiae
      of ﬁngers and toes) and disturbance of the autonomic nervous system
      (hyper- or hypotension, tachy- or bradycardia, bladder atony). Beware
      respiratory failure, which can rapidly progress to respiratory arrest. Serial
      vital capacity measurements are advised. Refer to the medical team/ICU.
      Multiple sclerosis
      Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demylinating disease of the CNS. It is more
      common in females and usually presents between ages 20–50. The disease
      follows a relapsing and remitting course with sensory loss, stiffness, and
      weakness of legs, ataxia, autonomic impairment (bladder dysfunction),
      and diplopia. Patients may present with these symptoms during their ﬁrst
      exacerbation or with optic neuritis (pain in one eye with visual blurring).
      Arrange admission under neurology. If patient has eye symptoms, arrange
      urgent ophthalmology review.
      Polymyositis
      Polymyositis is an inﬂammatory myopathy that presents with symmetrical
      proximal muscle weakness, arthritis and sometimes muscular tenderness.
      Patients report difﬁculty climbing stairs, standing from a low chair, or
      lifting arms to brush hair. Creatine kinase (CK) levels are raised. Refer to a
      rheumatologist for treatment.
      Myasthenia gravis
      This is a rare autoimmune disease, which results in painless weakness in
      which the muscles are fatiguable, but tendon reﬂexes and pupil responses
      are normal. Ptosis, diplopia, and blurred vision are the commonest pres-
      entations. Usually, cranial nerves are involved to a greater extent than
      limb muscles and the distribution is asymmetrical. Crises may present with
      severe muscle weakness in which the major concern relates to respiratory
      compromise—the patient may require emergency temporary ventilatory
      support.
      If the diagnosis is suspected in a patient not known to have myasthenia
      gravis, refer to a specialist who may wish to perform an edrophonium test.
      Patients with known myasthenia gravis may present with weakness due
      to under-treatment, over-treatment (cholinergic crisis), or an adverse
      reaction to an unrelated drug. Refer to the medical team for investigation.
                                     ACUTE GENERALIZED WEAKNESS               143

Periodic paralysis
This encompasses a family of hereditary diseases associated with defects
in muscle ion channels. Episodes of weakness can be associated with
ﬂuctuations in serum potassium levels lasting a few hours to a week.
Patients may develop myotonia between attacks and ﬁxed proximal
muscle weakness. Treatment tends only to be required for hypokalaemic
periodic paralysis with oral potassium supplementation.
Wound botulism
Botulism has made a recent come back in the IV drug injecting community.
Botulinum toxin inhibits the release of acetylcholine at neuromuscular
junctions, sympathetic and parasympathetic synapses. Wound infection
with Clostridium botulinum presents with diplopia, blurred vision, ptosis,
and neck weakness, which can progress to respiratory failure. Treatment is
with antitoxin, benzylpenicillin, and metronidazole, along with respiratory
support.
It is worth remembering that generalized weakness may also be caused by:
• Spinal cord compression.
• Tetanus.
• Alcoholic myopathy.
• Diphtheria.
• Lead poisoning.
144    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Stroke
      A stroke is an acute onset of focal neurological deﬁcit of vascular origin
      which lasts >24hr. The blood supply to the brain has two sources—the
      internal carotid and the basilar arteries. The internal carotids supply the
      anterior and middle cerebral arteries, known as the anterior circulation.
      The basilar artery supplies the posterior cerebral artery in 70% of people
      (the posterior circulation). Anterior and posterior communicating arteries
      in the circle of Willis provide collateral circulation in cases of carotid
      artery stenosis.
      Pathogenesis
      70% of strokes occur in those aged >70yrs, but they can occur at any age.
      Cerebral infarction (80%)
      Results from:
      • Thrombosis secondary to atherosclerosis, hypertension and rarely
        arteritis.
      • Cerebral embolism from AF, valve disease/replacement, post-MI, ven-
        tricular aneurysm, myxoma, endocarditis or cardiomyopathy.
      • An episode of hypoperfusion.
      Cerebral haemorrhage (20%)
      Associated with:
      • Hypertension (rupture of small arteries in the brain).
      • Subarachnoid haemorrhage (see b p.128).
      • Bleeding disorders (including anticoagulants) and intracranial tumours.
      Presentation
      Stroke preceded by neck pain may indicate carotid/vertebral artery dissec-
      tion or subarachnoid haemorrhage. Headache is an unusual presentation
      of stroke and may indicate cerebral haemorrhage. Be alert to the possi-
      bility of different pathology requiring urgent treatment (eg hypoglycaemia,
      Todd’s paresis, hemiplegic migraine, meningitis, encephalitis, brain abscess,
      head injury, Bell’s palsy, ‘Saturday night palsy’, tumours).
      Undertake a thorough examination including:
      • Assessment of mental status/GCS and signs of meningeal irritation.
      • Evidence of head or neck injury.
      • Examination of pupils, fundi, and cranial nerves.
      • Assessment of motor function (tone, power, and reﬂexes).
      • Assessment of sensory function (including speech and comprehension).
      • Examination for cerebellar signs (co-ordination, speech).
      • Check for sources of embolism (AF, murmurs, carotid bruits).
      Localization on clinical grounds alone can be difﬁcult, and differentiation
      between infarction and haemorrhage requires CT/MRI. NICE recommend
      the use of the ROSIER score to identify patients presenting with acute
      stroke (see Table 3.9). The ROSIER score will pick up the majority of
      patients who are having a stroke, but may not identify patients with
      posterior circulation infarcts.
                                                                    STROKE        145

 Table 3.9 ROSIER score for stroke recognition
 Criteria                                                      Points
 Facial weakness (asymmetrical)                                1
 Arm weakness (asymmetrical)                                   1
 Leg weakness (asymmetrical)                                   1
 Speech disturbance                                            1
 Visual ﬁeld defect                                            1
 Loss of consciousness or syncope                              –1
 Seizure                                                       –1
 Stroke unlikely if score 0 or less.

Investigation
Examine and investigate ﬁrstly to exclude other conditions and secondly
to conﬁrm the diagnosis of stroke. As a minimum requirement: BMG,
FBC, ESR, U&E, blood glucose, ECG, CXR. Monitor with pulse oximeter
(if SpO2 <94% obtain ABG) and cardiac monitor.
Emergency CT
Arrange emergency CT scan where:
• The patient presents with symptoms under 4hr of duration. They may be
  eligible for emergency thrombolysis treatment. Time is of the essence.
• The patient is on warfarin, heparin, or other anticoagulant.
• There is a known bleeding disorder.
• GCS <13.
• Unexplained progressive or ﬂuctuating symptoms.
• Papilloedema, neck stiffness or fever.
• There was a severe headache at onset of symptoms.
Management
• Immediately correct hypoglycaemia if present (see b p.150).
• Hypertension and labile BP are common in the early post-stroke period.
  Do not attempt to reduce the BP on presentation.
• Give supplemental oxygen only if SpO2 <95%.
• Screen the patient’s ability to swallow (try a teaspoon of water).
• If intracranial haemorrhage has been excluded, all patients should
  receive aspirin 300mg as soon as possible. Give this rectally if unable to
  swallow. Give PPI if there is a history of dyspepsia. If allergic to aspirin,
  give alternative antiplatelet drug such as clopidogrel.
• Wherever possible, admit patients directly to units where they can be
  cared for by staff specializing in stroke treatment and rehabilitation.
Thrombolysis
If intracranial haemorrhage has been excluded within 4hr of onset of
symptoms, alteplase may be administered by a trained and supported
emergency physician, only where the patient is managed within a specialist
acute stroke service. See local guidelines and http://www.nice.org.uk
146    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Transient ischaemic attacks
      A TIA is an episode of transient focal neurological deﬁcit of vascular origin
      lasting <24hr. A TIA gives major warning for the development of stroke
      (5% within 48hr, up to 50% in 5 years). Even in patients with resolution of
      symptoms/signs, most have evidence of infarction on CT/MRI.
      Presentation
      Carotid territory involvement produces unilateral weakness or sensory
      changes, dysphasia, homonymous hemianopia, or amaurosis fugax.
      Vertebrobasilar territory involvement produces blackouts, bilateral motor
      or sensory changes, vertigo, and ataxia.
      Causes
      Most TIAs result from thrombo-embolic disease involving either the
      heart (AF, mitral stenosis, artiﬁcial valves, post-MI) or extracranial vessels
      (carotid artery stenosis). Other causes include:
      • Hypertension.
      • Polycythaemia/anaemia.
      • Vasculitis (temporal arteritis, polyarteritis nodosa, SLE).
      • Sickle cell disease.
      • Hypoglycaemia.
      • Any cause of hypoperfusion (eg arrhythmia, hypovolaemia).
      • Syphilis.
      Assessment
      To diagnose a TIA, the symptoms must have resolved within 24hr.
      Document vital signs and perform a thorough neurological examination.
      Look for possible sources of emboli eg arrhythmias (especially AF), heart
      murmurs, carotid bruits, MI (mural thrombus).
      Investigations
      • Check BMG.
      • Send blood for FBC, ESR, U&E, blood glucose, lipids (INR if on anti-
        coagulants).
      • Record an ECG to search for MI, arrhythmia.
      Management
      • Calculate the ABCD2 score (Table 3.10).
      • Admit to a stroke unit patients scoring 4 or more points, or anyone
        with more than one TIA in the previous week.
      • Patients scoring 3 or less points, or who present one week after symp-
        toms have resolved, may be suitable for discharge with stroke team
        follow-up in the next week.
      • Start the patient on daily aspirin 300mg immediately.
      • Admit patients with continuing symptoms or residual deﬁcit (by deﬁni-
        tion, not a TIA).
      See http://www.nice.org.uk
                                                    TRANSIENT ISCHAEMIC ATTACKS   147

Table 3.10 ABCD2 score for TIAs
Criteria                                                                 Points
Age                           Age 60 or over                             1
BP at assessment              Systolic >140mmHg or diastolic >90mmHg     1
                              at assessment
Clinical features             Speech disturbance                         1
                              Unilateral weakness                        2
Duration of symptoms          10–59min                                   1
                              60 min or more                             2
Diabetes                                                                 1
Patients scoring >4 points are at increased risk.
148    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Seizures and status epilepticus
      First ﬁt
      A ﬁrst ﬁt has enormous consequences—do not diagnose without good
      evidence
      A detailed history from both the patient and any witnesses is crucial to the
      diagnosis. The presence of jerking movements or incontinence does not
      necessarily reﬂect epilepsy. Carefully document what was seen, in order
      to avoid confusion with vasovagal syncope or other types of collapse. Full
      rapid recovery suggests a syncopal event. Always consider alcohol/drug
      use, withdrawal states, hypoglycaemia, arrhythmia, head injury, subarach-
      noid haemorrhage, stroke/TIA, infection (including meningitis) or metabolic
      disturbance.
      As part of the general examination, carefully examine the CNS, documenting:
      GCS, confusion, focal abnormalities, ﬁndings on fundoscopy. Examine the
      cardiovascular system and check for signs of aspiration.
      Todd’s paresis may follow seizures—focal deﬁcit or hemiparesis may
      persist for up to 24hr and indicates a high chance of structural lesion.
      Investigations BMG, glucose, FBC, U&E, blood cultures if pyrexial, ECG,
      and if there are chest signs, a CXR. Check urine pregnancy test if of child-
      bearing age. All patients with new onset seizures need brain imaging at
      some stage: a signiﬁcant number have structural CNS abnormalities.
      Arrange emergency CT scan for patients with focal signs, head injury,
      known HIV, suspected intracranial infection, bleeding disorder (including
      anticoagulants), or where conscious level fails to improve as expected.
      Disposal A patient presenting with a ﬁrst seizure may be discharged
      home, accompanied by an adult, if they have normal neurological and
      cardiovascular examinations, the ECG and electrolytes are normal,
      and there is an appointment with an epilepsy specialist in the coming
      week. Admit any patient with more than one seizure that day or who
      does not ﬁt the above criteria. Ensure clear documentation of follow-up
      arrangements, including booked clinic appointment. Meantime, advise the
      patient not to drive or use machinery and to take sensible precautions,
      with supervision when performing activities, such as swimming/bathing
      until reviewed. Document this advice in the notes.
      Seizures in known epileptics
      Ask about any change from the patient’s normal seizure pattern. Possible
      causes of poor seizure control include: poor compliance with medica-
      tion, intercurrent illness/infection, alcohol, or drug ingestion. Examine to
      exclude any injury occurring from the ﬁt, especially to the head. Occult
      dislocations (eg shoulder) may occur. Check vital signs, BMG and anticon-
      vulsant levels if toxicity or poor compliance is suspected. Refer patients
      with a signiﬁcant change in seizure pattern to the medical team. Discharge
      to the care of a responsible adult those patients who are fully recovered
      with no injuries, symptoms or other concerns.
                                  SEIZURES AND STATUS EPILEPTICUS              149

Status epilepticus
This is continuous generalized seizures lasting >30min or without inter-
vening recovery. Cerebral damage i with duration. Precipitants include
cerebral infection, trauma, cerebrovascular disease, toxic/metabolic dis-
turbances, childhood febrile seizures. Mortality is 810% (due to underlying
pathology). Although seizures typically start as generalized, tonic/clonic,
these features may gradually diminish, making diagnosis difﬁcult (coma
with virtually no motor evidence of seizure, eg minimal twitching of ocular
muscles only). Complications include hypoglycaemia, pulmonary hyper-
tension, pulmonary oedema and precipitous i ICP can also occur.
Treatment of status epilepticus
• Establish a clear airway (a nasopharyngeal airway may help).
• Give high ﬂow O2.
• Monitor ECG, SpO2, T°, pulse rate, and BP.
• Obtain IV access, check BMG and correct hypoglycaemia if present
  (50mL of 20% glucose IV).
• Give IV lorazepam 4mg slowly into a large vein (diazepam 10mg is an
  alternative). Repeat IV lorazepam 4mg slowly after 10min if seizures
  continue.
• Buccal midazolam 10mg (can be repeated once) or rectal diazepam
  solution 10–20mg (can be repeated up to total 30mg) are alternatives if
  there is no venous access.
• If alcohol abuse or malnutrition is suspected, give slow IVI thiamine in
  the form of Pabrinex® 2 pairs of ampoules in 100mL of 0.9% saline (this
  occasionally causes anaphylaxis; be prepared to treat—see BNF).
• Consider the possibility of pregnancy-related ﬁts (eclampsia) in women
  of childbearing age and treat accordingly (with IV magnesium sulphate—
  —as outlined on b p.592).
• Check ABG and save blood for cultures, FBC, U&E, glucose, calcium,
  magnesium, LFTs, clotting, drug levels (and toxicology screen if poi-
  soning/overdose is suspected).
• Search for features of injury (especially head injury) and infection (look
  for a rash).
• If seizures continue despite above therapy, call ICU and consider the
  use of phenytoin (18mg/kg IV, 50mg/min) with ECG monitoring, or
  fosphenytoin (20mg/kg phenytoin equivalent IV, <150mg/min). A 70kg
  patient would require 1400mg phenytoin equivalent of fosphenytoin
  (28mL Pro-Epanutin®) diluted in 100mL 0.9% saline or 5% glucose, given
  over 10–15min.
• After 30min, contact ICU and proceed without delay to rapid sequence
  induction (ideally with thiopental), tracheal intubation, and continue
  anticonvulsant medication.
150    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Hypoglycaemia
      Hypoglycaemia can mimic any neurological presentation including coma,
      seizures, acute confusion, or isolated hemiparesis.
         Always exclude hypoglycaemia in any patient with coma,
            altered behaviour, neurological symptoms, or signs
      Plasma glucose is normally maintained at 3.6–5.8mmol/L. Cognitive func-
      tion deteriorates at levels <3.0mmol/L, but symptoms are uncommon
      >2.5mmol/L. In diabetics, however, the threshold for symptoms can be
      very variable. Hypoglycaemia is potentially fatal, and accounts for 2.4% of
      deaths in diabetics on insulin. Even mild episodes aggravate pre-existing
      microvascular complications and lead to cumulative brain damage.
      Causes
      In diabetics, the commonest cause is a relative imbalance of administered
      versus required insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drug. This may result
      from undue or unforeseen exertion, insufﬁcient or delayed food intake,
      excessive insulin administration (due to time, dose or type of insulin).
      Other causes are:
      • Alcohol (in addition to alcohol directly causing hypoglycaemia, the
         features of hypoglycaemia may be mistaken for alcohol intoxication or
         withdrawal).
      • Addison’s disease.
      • Pituitary insufﬁciency.
      • Post-gastric surgery.
      • Liver failure.
      • Malaria.
      • Insulinomas.
      • Extra-pancreatic tumours.
      • Attempted suicide or homicide with large doses of insulin or oral
         hypoglycaemic drug.
      Symptoms and signs
      Common features: sweating, pallor, tachycardia, hunger, trembling, altered
      or loss of consciousness, irritability, irrational or violent behaviour, ﬁtting,
      focal neurological deﬁcit (eg hemiplegia). Look for Medic-Alert bracelet/
      chain.
      Diagnosis
      Check venous or capillary blood with glucose oxidase strip (BMG). If
      <3.0mmol/L, take a venous sample for a formal blood glucose level,
      but give treatment without waiting for the result. Take appropriate
      samples if overdose of insulin, oral hypoglycaemic agent, or other drugs
      is suspected.
                                                      HYPOGLYCAEMIA           151

Treatment
This depends upon the conscious state and degree of co-operation of the
patient. Choose the appropriate option from the following:
• 5–15g of fast-acting oral carbohydrate (eg Lucozade®, sugar lumps,
  Dextrosol®, followed by biscuits and milk).
• Glucagon 1mg: SC, IM, or IV. Can be administered by relatives, ambu-
  lance crew and when venous access is difﬁcult. Glucagon is not suitable
  for treatment of hypoglycaemia due to sulphonylurea drugs, liver failure
  or in chronic alcoholism (as there may be little liver glycogen available
  for mobilization).
• Glucose 10% solution 50mL IV, repeated at 1–2min intervals until the
  patient is fully conscious or 250mL (25 g) has been given.
• Glucose 50% solution (25–50mL IV) is hypertonic, liable to damage
  veins and no more effective than glucose 10%. If glucose 50% is used,
  give it into a large vein and follow with a saline ﬂush.
• The time taken for return of consciousness and the incidence of
  nausea, vomiting and other adverse effects are similar for IV glucagon
  and glucose.
The persistence of an altered conscious level suggests another underlying
pathology (eg stroke), or may reﬂect the development of cerebral
oedema due to hypoglycaemia, which has a high mortality. Maintain
plasma glucose at 7–11mmol/L, contact ICU and consider mannitol and/
or dexamethasone. Arrange urgent investigation (eg CT scan) and search
for other causes of altered consciousness.
Overdose Glucose infusions may be needed for 24hr or longer after
poisoning with insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drug, depending upon
exactly what and how much has been taken. Hypokalaemia may be a
problem. Block excision of the injection site has been used as successful
treatment for insulin overdose. Octreotide may be helpful in recurrent
hypoglycaemia due to overdose of a sulphonylurea drug (b p.197).
Discharge
90% of patients fully recover in 20min. Provided that the cause for
the episode has been identiﬁed and fully corrected, it is reasonable
to discharge the patient after observation in the ED, with appropriate
follow-up.
Arrange follow up having considered the following:
• Why did this episode occur?
• Has there been a recent change of regimen, other drugs, alcohol, etc.?
• Is the patient developing hypoglycaemic unawareness or autonomic
  dysfunction?
152    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Hyperglycaemic crises
      Diabetic keto-acidosis (DKA) is caused by absolute or relative d insulin
      levels. Plasma glucose i causes an osmotic diuresis, with Na+ and water
      loss (up to 8–10L), hypotension, hypoperfusion, and shock. Normal
      compensatory hormonal mechanisms are overwhelmed and lead to
      i lipolysis. In the absence of insulin this results in the production of non-
      esteriﬁed fatty acids, which are oxidized in the liver to ketones.
      Younger undiagnosed diabetics often present with DKA developing
      over 1–3 days. Plasma glucose levels may not be grossly i; euglycaemic
      ketoacidosis can occur. Urinalysis demonstrates ketonuria.
      Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state (HHS) is caused by intercurrent
      illness, inadequate diabetic therapy and dehydration. It develops over
      days/weeks, and is more common in the elderly. HHS is characterized by
      i glucose levels (>30mmol/L), i blood osmolality, and a lack of urinary
      ketones. Mortality is 85–10%, but may be even higher in the elderly.
      Causes
      Think of the four ‘I’s separately or (often) in combination:
      • Infection: common primary foci are urinary tract, respiratory tract, skin.
      • Infarction: myocardial, stroke, GI tract, peripheral vasculature.
      • Insufﬁcient insulin.
      • Intercurrent illness: many underlying conditions precipitate or aggravate
        DKA and HHS.
      Clinical features
      Hyperglycaemic crisis may present in various ways. Some of the following
      are usually present:
      Signs of dehydration thirst, polydipsia, polyuria, d skin turgor, dry mouth,
      hypotension, tachycardia.
      GI symptoms are common in DKA with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal
      pain. This can be severe and mimic an ‘acute surgical abdomen’.
      Hyperventilation (respiratory compensation for the metabolic acidosis)
      with deep rapid breathing (Kussmaul respiration) and the smell of acetone
      on the breath, is pathognomonic of DKA.
      True coma is uncommon, but altered conscious states and/or focal
      neurological deﬁcits (which may correct with treatment) are seen
      particularly in older patients with HHS.
      Diagnosis and investigations
      Aim to conﬁrm the diagnosis and search for possible underlying cause(s):
      • Check BMG and test the urine for glucose and ketones.
      • Send blood for U&E, blood glucose, creatinine, osmolality (or calculate
        it): mOsm/L= (2 × Na+) + glucose (mmol/L) + urea (mmol/L).
      • Check ABG (look for metabolic acidosis ±respiratory compensation).
      • FBC and CXR (to search for pneumonia).
      • ECG and cardiac monitoring (look for evidence of hyper/hypokalaemia).
      • Blood cultures and if appropriate, throat or wound swabs.
      • Urine/sputum microscopy and culture.
                                               HYPERGLYCAEMIC CRISES             153

Treatment
• If altered consciousness/coma is present, provide and maintain a patent
  airway.
• Give high FiO2 by mask. Consider the possible need for GA and IPPV
  for coma ± severe shock.
• Commence IV infusion with 0.9% saline (if the lab result subsequently
  shows initial plasma Na+ to be >150mmol/L, give 0.45% saline). Give
  1000mL of 0.9% saline over 0.5–1hr, then 500mL/hr for next 2–3hr.
  Persistent hypotension may require i in infusion rate and/or colloid
  administration. Avoid over-rapid infusion with the risks of pulmonary
  oedema and ARDS, especially in the elderly and patients with IHD.
• Insulin: start an infusion of soluble insulin using an IV pump or paediatric
  burette at 6U/hr. No loading dose is required. Check plasma glucose
  levels every hour initially. When plasma glucose <14mmol/L, d insulin
  infusion rate to 4U/hr and replace the saline solution with 10% dextrose
  to help ketone clearance and acid-base state.
• Electrolyte balance: although total body K+ is low, plasma K+ may be
  normal, i or d. With treatment, K+ enters cells and plasma levels d:
  therefore unless initial K+ levels are >5.5mmol/L, give 20mmol/hr of
  KCl, monitor ECG, and check K+ levels hourly. Despite the presence of
  metabolic acidosis, do not give sodium bicarbonate. Other electrolytes
  such as Ca2+, Mg2+, and PO42 – are commonly disturbed, but rarely need
  emergency correction.
• Consider an NG tube to d risk of gastric dilation and aspiration.
• Monitor urine output (most accurate with urinary catheter).
• Consider a central venous catheter to monitor CVP to guide treatment
  in the elderly or severe illness.
• Arrange admission to ICU, HDU, or acute medical admissions unit.
Other aspects of treatment
Signs of infection are often masked. T° is rarely i, and i WCC may only
reﬂect ketonaemia. If in doubt, treat with a broad-spectrum antibiotic.
Over-rapid ﬂuid replacement can cause cardiac failure, cerebral oedema,
and ARDS, especially in patients with underlying cardiac disease or the
elderly. CVP monitoring may be needed.
Clotting Hyperglycaemia causes a hypercoagulable state: DVT or PE may
occur. Administer prophylactic anticoagulation with LMWH in DKA or
hyperosmolar states.
154    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Sodium derangements
      Abnormal sodium states can occur with hypervolaemia, euvolaemia, or
      hypovolaemia, depending on the underlying pathophysiological process.
      Hypernatraemia
      Causes include diabetes insipidus (lack of ADH or lack of renal response
      to ADH), diarrhoea, vomiting, diuretics, hypertonic saline, sodium
      bicarbonate administration, or Cushing’s syndrome.
      Treatment should not correct the Na concentration faster than 1mmol/L/hr.
      Use 0.9% saline to correct hypovolaemia (patients who have tachycardia,
      hypotension, or postural hypotension). Once the patient is euvolaemic,
      use an infusion of 0.45% saline, or 5% dextrose. The free water deﬁcit can
      be calculated using the formula:
        Free water deﬁcit (in litres) = 0.6 × weight (kg) × (serum Na/140–1)
      and should be replaced over 48hr (in addition to normal maintenance ﬂuids).
      Check serum Na+ after 2–3hr to monitor correction rate.
      Complications of hypernatraemia include seizures, subdural and intra-
      cerebral haemorrhages, ischaemic stroke, and dural sinus thrombosis.
      Rapid correction of sodium levels (particularly in chronic hypernatraemia)
      can cause cerebral oedema and further neurological complications.
      Hyponatraemia
      Causes include excessive ﬂuid loss replaced by hypotonic ﬂuids (diarrhoea,
      burns, prolonged exercise, such as marathon running), polydypsia,
      ecstasy ingestion, syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion, nephrotic
      syndrome, renal impairment, hepatic cirrhosis, cardiac failure, and many
      prescription drugs (including diuretics, heparin, and ACE inhibitors).
      Treatment of acute hyponatraemia (<24hr duration) Those with mild
      symptoms can be effectively treated by ﬂuid restriction. Patients who
      present with seizures or signs of raised intracranial pressure are at risk of
      death and should be treated more aggressively. Serum Na+ <120mmol/L
      is associated with risk of brain herniation. Give up to 200mL of 2.7% saline
      IV over 30min and recheck serum Na+ levels.
      Treatment of chronic hyponatraemia (>24hr duration) is associated with
      central pontine myelinolysis, particularly in patients with low K+ levels or
      alcoholic patients. Chronic hyponatraemia should be corrected no faster
      than 10mmol/L in 24hr. Treat the underlying cause. This may be as simple
      as discontinuing a diuretic. Patients with cardiac failure, cirrhosis, or
      nephrotic syndrome (hypervolaemic patients) should be ﬂuid restricted.
      Severe hyponatraemia in association with seizures or d GCS may be
      cautiously treated with hypertonic saline (2.7% saline 200mL over 30min
      and recheck serum Na+). Aim to increase serum Na+ by no more than
      5mmol/L using this method.
      See www.gain-ni.org
                                                   ADDISONIAN CRISIS          155

Addisonian crisis
Acute adrenocortical insufﬁciency is rare and easily missed. The most
common cause is sudden withdrawal of chronic steroid therapy (delib-
erately or inadvertently). An Addisonian crisis may also be precipitated
in these patients by intercurrent injury, infection or stress—increasing
steroid requirement. 80% of Addison’s disease in the UK is idiopathic
(autoimmune), and may be associated with Graves’ disease, Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis, insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), pernicious
anaemia, hypoparathyroidism, and ovarian failure. Other causes include
TB, fungal infections, metastatic disease, congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
drugs (eg metyrapone or cytotoxic agents), haemorrhage into the adrenal
glands occurring as a complication of anticoagulation or meningococcal
septicaemia (Waterhouse–Friderichsen syndrome). Look for a Medic–
Alert bracelet indicating that the patient is taking steroids.
Precipitating factors
Infection, trauma, MI, cerebral infarction, asthma, hypothermia, alcohol,
pregnancy, exogenous steroid withdrawal or reduction.
Clinical features
Addison’s disease frequently has an insidious onset with weakness, apathy,
anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain (which may be severe enough to
mimic an acute abdomen), and oligomenorrhoea. In crisis, the main fea-
tures may be shock (tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstriction, severe pos-
tural hypotension occasionally with syncope, oliguria, profound muscle
weakness, confusion, altered consciousness leading to coma), and hypogly-
caemia. Chronic features of Addison’s disease are: areas of vitiligo and
hyperpigmentation in the palmar creases, buccal mucosa, areolae, scars,
and in the axillae.
Investigations
Hyperkalaemia, hyponatraemia, hypoglycaemia, uraemia, mild acidosis,
hypercalcaemia, and eosinophilia may be present. If Addisonian crisis is
suspected, take appropriate blood samples, but start treatment without
waiting for results.
Management
• Obtain IV access.
• Take blood for cortisol (10mL in a heparinized tube) and ACTH if pos-
  sible. Contact the biochemistry lab to warn them that these tests will be
  required.
• If features of haemodynamic compromise are present, commence
  volume replacement with IV 0.9% saline if shocked.
• Give hydrocortisone sodium succinate 100mg IV stat.
• Take blood, urine, and sputum for culture and sensitivity.
• Check BMG and blood glucose, and treat hypoglycaemia with 50mL of
  10% glucose IV (repeated if necessary).
• If infection is suspected as a precipitating cause, consider giving broad
  spectrum antibiotics.
• Refer for admission.
156    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Thyrotoxic crisis
      A rare condition, occurring in 1–2% of patients with established
      hyperthyroidism (usually toxic diffuse goitre ‘Graves’ disease’). Mortality
      is signiﬁcant (810%).
      Causes
      It is often precipitated by a physiological stressor:
      • Premature or inappropriate cessation of anti-thyroid therapy.
      • Recent surgery or radio-iodine treatment.
      • Intercurrent infection (especially chest infection).
      • Trauma.
      • Emotional stress.
      • DKA, hyperosmolar diabetic crisis, insulin-induced hypoglycaemia.
      • Thyroid hormone overdose.
      • Pre-eclampsia.
      Clinical features
      Onset may be sudden with features of hyperthyroidism and adrenergic
      overactivity. Fever, cardiovascular, and neurological symptoms are common.
      Weight loss, i appetite, tremor, irritability, emotional lability, heat
      intolerance, sweating, itch, oligomenorrhoea, agitation, anxiety, confusion,
      coma, palpitations, tachycardia, AF (rarely, complete heart block). It may
      mimic an ‘acute abdomen’, with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting.
      Differential diagnosis
      Includes acute pulmonary oedema, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, septic
      shock, anticholinergic or sympathomimetic overdose, drug withdrawal, or
      acute anxiety states.
      Investigations
      • U&E, BMG, and blood glucose, Ca2+ (hypercalcaemia occurs in 810%).
      • FBC, differential WCC, coagulation screen.
      • Screen for infection: MSU, blood cultures, sputum.
      • T4 and T3 (for later analysis), TSH.
      • CXR (searching for pulmonary infection or congestive heart failure).
      • ECG (looking for arrhythmias).
      Treatment
      • Manage the airway and give O2 if indicated.
      • Obtain IV access and commence IVI 0.9% saline (initially 500mL 4-hourly).
      • Pass NG tube if vomiting.
      • If sedation is required, give small titrated amounts of benzodiazepine
        (eg diazepam 5–20mg PO/IV) or haloperidol.
      • Commence dexamethasone 4mg 6 hourly PO or give hydrocortisone
        100mg IV.
      • Give broad spectrum antibiotic if infection is suspected.
      • Consider cooling measures in hyperthermia.
      • Refer for admission (consider admission to ICU).
      • Once admitted, propranolol (or esmolol) and carbimazole will normally
        be given together with iodine.
      • Do not give aspirin (this can exacerbate the clinical problem by dis-
        placing thyroxine from thyroid binding globulin).
This page intentionally left blank
158    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Urinary tract infection
      The urinary tract is normally bacteriologically sterile. Urine infection is
      present if >105 colony-forming units are present per mL of urine. Except
      at the extremes of age, urinary tract infections (UTIs) are much more
      common in females due to the shorter urethral length. Most UTIs occur
      because of organisms invading the bladder via the urethra. Proximal
      invasion via the ureter may result in acute or chronic pyelonephritis,
      particularly if anatomical derangement exists with impaired ureteric
      or bladder emptying. In both sexes, underlying structural abnormality i
      UTI risk. Blood-borne spread of infection to the urinary tract can occur,
      (eg in bacterial endocarditis or systemic Gram –ve infection). UTI is
      usually caused by a single organism. The commonest organism (90%) at all
      ages is E. coli. Proteus, Klebsiella, and saprophytic staphylococci account for
      most of the remainder in adults. Other organisms (eg Pseudomonas) more
      commonly cause UTI in hospitalized patients or following instrumentation.
      Urinary tract infection: presentation
      UTIs usually present to the ED in one of two ways
      Lower UTI (cystitis) Dysuria, frequency, haematuria, suprapubic discomfort,
      urgency, burning, cloudy urine with an offensive smell. Patients with acute
      urethral syndrome have identical symptoms, but –ve urine culture.
      Upper UTI (acute pyelonephritis) Often systemically unwell with malaise,
      fever, loin and/or back pain, vomiting, rigors and occasionally Gram –ve
      septicaemia.
      Investigations
      Reagent strip (dipstix) urinalysis may show haematuria, proteinuria, +ve
      nitrite, and leucocyte esterase tests. A patient with clear urine, –ve on
      dipstix testing, is extremely unlikely to have a UTI. False +ve results may
      be secondary to urinary tract tumours or excessive exercise. A false –ve
      nitrite test may reﬂect pathogens that do not convert dietary nitrates to
      nitrites.
      Urine microscopy may show leucocytes (>100/mL correlates well with
      infection, but may be due to contamination or other urinary tract
      pathology). RBCs are commonly seen on microscopy, but in isolation
      have a low degree of sensitivity or speciﬁcity for UTI. Underlying renal
      pathology is suggested by ﬁnding urinary crystals, RBC, or granular casts.
      MSU for culture and sensitivity. Transport the sample to the laboratory
      without delay to ensure that bacterial overgrowth does not artiﬁcially i
      the count. Dipslides dipped into freshly passed urine and transported in a
      plastic container to the laboratory are an alternative.
                                          URINARY TRACT INFECTION             159

Treatment
• It is usually reasonable to discharge female patients with uncomplicated
  lower UTIs with antibiotics. Commence a 3–6 day course of trimetho-
  prim or nitrofurantoin. Provide advice regarding ﬂuid intake, no ‘holding
  on’, and voiding after intercourse. Drinking barley water is as effective
  as attempts at urinary alkalinization with sodium bicarbonate. (Note:
  urinary alkalinization renders nitrofurantoin ineffective). Advise the
  patient to see her GP for review, MSU result, and repeat MSU.
• Elderly men and women with asymptomatic bacteriuria should not
  receive antibiotic treatment unless they show signs of being unwell.
• In pregnancy, both symptomatic and asymptomatic bacteriuria should
  be treated with an antibiotic such as amoxicillin.
• Given the difﬁculty in distinguishing prostatitis from simple UTI in men,
  they should receive a 2-week course of ciproﬂoxacin, trimethoprim, or
  co-amoxiclav. Arrange GP follow-up.
• Treat catheterized patients with symptoms or signs of UTI for 7 days
  with ciproﬂoxacin or co-amoxiclav. Treatment is more effective if the
  catheter is changed in the ED prior to commencing antibiotics.
• Do not treat catheterized patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria with
  antibiotics.
Refer for investigation and treatment all male patients and females with
recurrent infections, pregnancy, GU malformation, immunosuppression,
or renal impairment.
Patients with acute pyelonephritis usually require admission for parenteral
antibiotics, ﬂuid replacement, and analgesia. Assess and treat for severe
sepsis (b Shock, p.60).
See http://www.sign.ac.uk
160    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Chronic renal failure
      Patients with established chronic renal failure (CRF) are likely to be very
      well known to the hospital. Obtain old notes and recent blood results,
      and liaise early with in-patient specialist teams.
      Established chronic renal failure (not on dialysis)
      Patients with mild CRF (glomerular inﬁltration rate (GFR) >40mL/min—
      100mL/min) are unlikely to have speciﬁc problems related to their
      underlying renal failure. With GFR <40mL/min, and especially if GFR
      <10mL/min, complications may inﬂuence presentation and treatment.
      These patients are prone to pathological fractures.
      Secondary hyperparathyroidism and osteomalacia (lack of active vitamin D)
      occur in moderate GFR. In severe CRF, aluminium bone disease, and B2-
      microglobulin related amyloidosis may be associated with pathological
      fractures.
      ‘Pseudo-gout’ due to high Ca2+/PO4– production and twitching/tetany due
      to hypocalcaemia may occur.
      Other problems include:
      Defective regulation of extra-cellular ﬂuid volume There is an i risk of
      ﬂuid depletion in moderate CRF and ﬂuid retention in severe CRF. High
      dose diuretics may be required in severe disease: the combination of
      furosemide and metolazone may be effective even with very low GFRs.
      Hyperkalaemia Most patients preserve potassium balance, but cannot
      deal with sudden K+ loads (eg dietary, tissue damage/catabolism, GI
      bleed). Associated d Ca2+ compounds the cardiac effects. Plasma K+ may
      i very quickly, so monitor ECG and check K+ frequently.
      Hypertension Often severe and resistant, with an i incidence of
      accelerated phase. Ciclosporin and erythropoietin i BP, and can
      precipitate hypertensive encephalopathy.
      Drug effects Drugs may accumulate (eg opioids, acyclovir, some
      antibiotics), worsen renal failure (eg NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, which d
      renal perfusion), cause hyperkalaemia (eg K+ sparing diuretics, ACE
      inhibitors, NSAIDs).
      Infections Impaired WBC function, with i risk of severe infection and
      features of infection (eg pain, fever) may be masked by the relative
      immuno-compromised state.
      Bleeding Platelet function is impaired.
      Pericarditis A sign of severe CRF, indicating the need for dialysis.
      Neurological dysfunction Usually a sign of severe uraemia—convulsions
      and/or altered conscious state indicate a global metabolic disturbance.
                                               CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE             161

Common emergency presentation in haemodialysis patients
Pulmonary oedema Usually occurs shortly before the next dialysis session
and may reﬂect ﬂuid overload due to non-compliance with diet and ﬂuid
restriction. Most are virtually anuric, so diuretics are ineffective. Get the
patient on dialysis without delay. While this is being arranged give high
ﬂow O2 and SL buccal or IV nitrates.
Pre-dialysis hyperkalaemia May present with neuromuscular symptoms
(eg muscle spasms, weakness, paralysis, paraesthesiae) or arrhythmias,
including cardiac arrest. Standard treatment (b p.162) can buy time
while emergency dialysis is arranged. When giving glucose/insulin, give
6U of insulin at most (there is a risk of late hypoglycaemia, since insulin
half-life will be i).
Complications of vascular access Arteriovenous ﬁstulae are a dialysis
patient’s lifeline—never occlude limb with BP cuffs or tourniquets. Do
not use for vascular access unless life-threatening emergency. Acute
shunt thrombosis (loss of palpable thrill, often local pain/redness) is a
vascular emergency. Arteriovenous ﬁstulae and central lines are common
infection sources (usually staphylococcal), often with no overt external
abnormality, but presenting with acute ‘viral illness’ symptoms.
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
Bacterial peritonitis Occurs every 12–18 patient-months. Features are
cloudy drained dialysate bags, abdominal pain, and peritonism. Systemic
sepsis is usually absent or minimal. Staphylococci are most common
organisms. Suspect underlying surgical cause (most often diverticular
abscess) if Gram –ve organisms or anaerobes present in drainage ﬂuid,
and particularly if >1 type of organism is found on microscopy or culture.
Diabetic patients on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis can
develop acute severe (usually non-ketotic) hyperglycaemia, related to high
dialysate glucose concentrations (80–140mmol/L).
Hernias of all types, leakage of dialysate into the abdominal wall or the
pleural cavity, and scrotal swelling (open processus vaginalis) may occur.
Transplant patients
Contact the transplant team whenever any transplant patient presents
to the ED. They will know the patient well and will advise about drug
therapy, intercurrent problems, and help with follow-up.
Acute rejection Signs include pain, tenderness, and swelling over graft,
d urine output, fever, systemic upset, biochemical deterioration. Often
indistinguis\hable from acute bacterial infection: if in doubt treat for both,
pending results of further testing by specialists (renal biopsy, blood, and
urine cultures).
Infections May be opportunist, whilst ‘conventional’ infections are unduly
severe, with response modulated by steroids.
Poor wound healing, avascular necrosis and pathological fractures May
be caused by steroids.
162    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Hyperkalaemia
      Hyperkalaemia is classiﬁed as mild (K+ 5.5–6.0mmol/L), moderate (K+
      6.1–6.9mmol/L) or severe (K+ >7.0mmol/L).
      Causes
      Spurious Sample haemolysed or taken from limb with IVI containing K+.
      d Renal excretion Acute kidney injury, patients with chronic renal failure or
      on dialysis with K+ load, K+ sparing diuretics (eg spironolactone, amiloride).
      Cell injury Crush injury and other causes of rhabdomyolysis, burns,
      tumour cell necrosis, massive, or incompatible blood transfusion.
      K+ cellular shifts Acidosis from any cause (eg DKA), drugs (suxamethonium,
      B-blockers).
      Hypoaldosteronism Addison’s disease, drug-induced (NSAIDs, ACE
      inhibitors).
      Clinical features
      There may be muscle weakness/cramps, paraesthesiae, hypotonia, focal
      neurological deﬁcits. Dangerous hyperkalaemia may be asymptomatic.
      ECG changes
      ECG changes typically progress as hyperkalaemia worsens as follows:
      • Peaked T waves.
      • Small, broad, or absent P waves.
      • Widening QRS complex.
      • Sinusoidal (‘sine wave’ pattern) QRST.
      • AV dissociation or VT/VF.
      Management of severe hyperkalaemia
      Urgent treatment is needed if K+ >6.5mmol/L, unless this is a spurious and
      incorrect result. If K+ is reported as >6.5mmol/L obtain venous access,
      monitor and review the ECG. Start treatment immediately (as indicated
      below) if there are ECG changes of hyperkalaemia. If there are no ECG signs
      of hyperkalaemia take another blood sample for U&E, with care to avoid
      haemolysis, and a heparinized sample to measure K+ on a blood gas machine:
      • Give 10mL of 10% calcium chloride slowly IV (over 5min). This
         does not lower K+, but antagonizes cardiac membrane excitability.
         Hypercalcaemia may possibly potentiate toxicity in patients on digoxin,
         so give as an IVI over 30min in these patients.
      • Give 10U of short-acting human soluble insulin with 50mL of 50%
         glucose IV. This helps i cellular uptake of K+, lowering serum levels by
         up to 1mmol/L within 1hr.
      • Give 5mg nebulized salbutamol, repeated once as necessary. This will
         lower K+ in most patients, acting in 830min.
      • Correct volume deﬁcits/acidosis with IV ﬂuids and isotonic (1.26%)
         sodium bicarbonate or aliquots (25–50mL) of 8.4%. Beware ﬂuid over-
         load/osmolar effects, especially in dialysis patients.
      • Correct the underlying cause if possible (eg steroid therapy for
         Addison’s disease).
      • Contact the nephrology team urgently for patients with acute or
         chronic renal failure as emergency dialysis may be needed.
      Hyperkalaemia in children—see b Renal failure, p.694.
                                                        HYPERKALAEMIA          163

Management of hyperkalaemic cardiac arrest
If a patient in cardiac arrest is known to have hyperkalaemia, follow the
standard ALS guidelines (b p.46), plus one or more of the following:
• Give 10mL of 10% calcium chloride IV by rapid bolus injection.
• Consider giving 10U of short-acting insulin + 100mL 50% glucose
   rapidly IV.
• If there is severe acidosis, give 50mL 8.4% sodium bicarbonate rapidly IV.
• Consider haemodialysis for cardiac arrest induced by hyperkalaemia
   which is resistant to medical treatment.
Management of moderate hyperkalaemia
Provided that the result is not spurious, a K+ of 6–6.5mmol/L may be
regarded as ‘moderately’ severe hyperkalaemia.
• Obtain venous access and monitor ECG.
• If there are ECG changes, treat as for severe elevation opposite.
• If there are no ECG changes, give 10U of short-acting human soluble
  insulin with 50mL of 50% glucose IV over 15–30min.
• Look for and treat the underlying cause and consider: diuretics
  (eg furosemide 1mg/kg IV slowly) and dialysis.
Management of mild hyperkalaemia
K+ of 5.5–6mmol/L. Treat the underlying cause and treat any associated
hypovolaemia. Discuss need for speciﬁc intervention (diuretic, dialysis)
with the medical team.
164    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Hypokalaemia
      Deﬁned as K+ <3.5mmol/L, it is relatively common. Moderate hypoka-
      laemia may result in lethargy, weakness, and leg cramps. In severe cases
      (K+ <2.5mmol/L), rhabdomyolysis and respiratory difﬁculties may occur.
      ECG changes include prominent U waves and ﬂattened T waves.
      Treatment In most instances, aim to replace potassium gradually. The
      maximum recommended IV infusion rate of potassium is 20mmol/hr.
      Restrict more rapid rates of IV infusion (eg 20mmol in 20–30min) to those
      patients who have unstable arrhythmias when cardiac arrest is imminent
      (obtain senior/expert advice). Ensure cardiac monitoring occurs during
      any potassium IVI.
      Associated magnesium deﬁciency
      Many patients with potassium deﬁciency are also magnesium deﬁcient.
      Consider replacing magnesium in those patients who have severe
      hypokalaemia.
      See also www.resus.org.uk
                                                             PORPHYRIA         165

Porphyria
The porphyrias are haem biosynthesis disorders in which enzyme
deﬁciencies cause accumulation of porphyrin and porphyrin precursors.
Most cases are hereditary, but abnormal porphyrin metabolism may
develop in iron deﬁciency, alcohol excess and lead poisoning. The acute
porphyrias (acute intermittent porphyria, variegate porphyria and heredi-
tary coproporphyria) affect 81 in 10,000 people in the UK. The non-acute
porphyrias (eg porphyria cutanea tarda) do not produce acute attacks, but
cause skin photosensitivity sometimes associated with liver disease.
Attacks of acute porphyria are often caused by drugs: barbiturates,
oestrogens, progesterones, sulphonamides, methyldopa, carbamazepine,
phenytoin, sulphonylureas, chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, danazol, some
antihistamines. Other precipitants include: alcohol, smoking, dieting,
emotional and physical stress, infection, substance misuse, pregnancy.
Clinical features of acute porphyria
• Abdominal pain is common and can be severe, with nausea, vomiting
  and constipation. Abdominal examination may be normal or there may
  be mild generalized tenderness.
• Peripheral neuropathy is usually motor, rather than sensory, and may
  progress to paralysis and respiratory failure.
• Tachycardia, hypertension, and postural hypotension.
• Psychiatric manifestations: agitation, depression, mania and hallucina-
  tions.
• Hyponatraemia due to inappropriate ADH secretion can cause ﬁts or
  coma.
Investigation and management of acute porphyria
Look for a Medic-Alert bracelet. Obtain old medical notes.
If an acute attack is suspected, send a fresh urine sample (protected from
light) to test for amino laevulinic acid and porphobilinogen. In an attack,
urine goes dark red or brown, especially if left exposed to light (due to
polymerization of porphobilinogen).
Treat acute attacks supportively (if necessary in ICU). Maintain
carbohydrate intake (PO or IV). Control mild pain with paracetamol or
aspirin; moderate/severe pain with morphine (± anti-emetic). Consider
chlorpromazine for agitation; propranolol to control severe hypertension.
Management of status epilepticus is difﬁcult as many anticonvulsants are
contraindicated: choose IV diazepam in the ﬁrst instance. Haem arginate
helps some patients with acute crises (take specialist advice).
Prescribing for patients with porphyria
Many drugs can precipitate attacks, so check with the patient and the
BNF.
However, the safety of many drugs in porphyria is uncertain and effects
vary between patients. If in doubt, obtain specialist advice. In addition to
those mentioned earlier, safe drugs appear to be: ibuprofen, penicillin,
ciproﬂoxacin, bupivicaine.
Data is also available on the internet at www.uq.edu.au/porphyria
166    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Bleeding disorders: 1
       Contact a haematologist whenever treating a patient with a
                  known or suspected bleeding disorder
      Haemostasis requires co-ordination between the vascular system, platelets
      and coagulation pathways to limit blood loss from the circulation. Platelets
      interact with vascular subendothelium, forming a primary platelet plug,
      which is strengthened by cross-linked ﬁbrin strands formed via the coagu-
      lation cascade to allow restoration of vascular integrity (see Fig. 3.24). The
      ﬁbrinolytic systems prevent excess clot formation, and inappropriate local
      or generalized thrombosis, by promoting lysis of ﬁbrin.
      Recognition of bleeding
      Bleeding is expected after trauma, but suspect a bleeding disorder if spon-
      taneous or excess haemorrhage occurs from multiple or uninjured sites,
      into deep tissues, joints or delayed bleeding occurs (hr/day). Bleeding dis-
      orders may be congenital or acquired. Ask about previous bleeding after
      trauma, dentistry or surgery and the family history.
      Congenital disorders Haemophilia A (Factor VIII deﬁciency), Haemophilia B
      (Factor IX deﬁciency), and von Willebrand’s disease. Most adults with a
      congenital disorder know the nature of it and carry a National Haemophilia
      card or Medic-Alert bracelet giving details. Many haemophiliacs know
      more about their required treatment than you! They will be registered
      and known at a haemophilia centre.
      Acquired disorders May be due to liver disease, uraemia, drug use (ask
      speciﬁcally about aspirin, NSAIDs, warfarin/anticoagulants, alcohol), or
      unrecognized conditions such as haematological malignancy.
      Hypothermia (b p.254) from whatever cause aggravates any bleeding
      tendency. For example, an INR assay performed at 32°C will be prolonged
      to the same extent as would occur with a Factor IX level of 2.5% of
      normal. The severity of this may not be recognized merely from standard
      tests as these are performed at 37°C.
      The site of bleeding can give a clue as to the abnormality. Platelet problems
      (usually thrombocytopenia) often present with mucocutaneous bleeding
      (eg epistaxis, GI, GU, or heavy menstrual bleeding, bruising, purpura,
      and petechial haemorrhages). Bleeding into joints or potential spaces (eg
      retroperitoneal) and delayed bleeding is more often due to coagulation
      factor deﬁciencies. Patients with mucocutaneous bleeding and haemorrhage
      into deep spaces may have a combined platelet and coagulation factor
      abnormality (eg disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)).
                                                        BLEEDING DISORDERS: 1      167

Investigations
FBC Remember that in acute bleeds, Hb and Hct values fail to demonstrate
the severity of red cell loss as haemodilution takes time. Platelet counts
<100 × 109/L indicate thrombocytopenia, and <20 × 109/L are associated
with a risk of spontaneous bleeding. Bleeding because of platelet problems
can occur with ‘normal’ counts if platelet function is abnormal (eg with
aspirin or clopidogrel).
Prothrombin time (INR) Used to monitor anticoagulant control in patients
on coumarin drugs and may be prolonged in liver disease.
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) Tests components of
intrinsic and common coagulation pathways (essentially all factors except
VII and XIII).
Individual factor levels Can be determined by speciﬁc assays together
with inhibitor screening tests for antibodies that can prolong normal
plasma clotting.

                                    Vessel injury

                                 Collagen exposure

                                                                       Tissue
                                   Platelet release                    factor
                                       reaction

                     Serotonin                          Platelet
                                                      phospholipid
                                                                        Blood
  Vasoconstriction
                              Thromboxane A2, ADP                    coagulation
                                                                       cascade

                                 Platelet aggregation

      Reduced                         Primary
     blood flow                   haemostatic plug                   Thrombin

                                   Platelet fusion

                                      Stable
                                                                       Fibrin
                                  haemostatic plug

Fig. 3.24 Reactions involved in haemostasis.
168    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Bleeding disorders: 2
      General aspects of treatment
      • Perform routine wound/fracture management of patients with bleeding
        disorders, but consider need for prior or simultaneous administration
        of factor concentrates/platelets under haematological guidance.
      • Spontaneous or traumatic bleeding into the neck or pharynx may cause
        rapid airway compromise.
      • Always consider intracranial haemorrhage in a patient with headache,
        neurological symptoms or minor head trauma. Consult to consider
        need for commencing treatment before speciﬁc investigation (eg CT).
      • Never give IM injections.
      • Do not attempt central line placement except in extremis, since life-
        threatening, uncontrollable bleeding can result.
      • Before giving any drug, check whether it may aggravate the condition or
        interfere with intercurrent therapy.
      Speciﬁc conditions
      Vascular lesions May be inherited (Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, pseudo-
      xanthoma elasticum, osteogenesis imperfecta, haemorrhagic telangiectasia)
      or acquired (eg due to steroids, infection e.g. meningococcaemia, thrombotic
      thrombocytopenic purpura, vasculitis, scurvy).
      Platelet disorders Capillary-related mucocutaneous bleeding is common
      and may occur immediately after injury/surgery (eg dental extractions).
      The platelet count may be normal or d. Acquired thrombocytopenia may
      be due to drugs, toxins, infections, autoimmune conditions (eg ITP), DIC,
      or to massive blood transfusion. Abnormal platelet function occurs with
      uraemia, myeloproliferative disorders, and drugs (eg aspirin).
      Coagulation pathway disorders Congenital coagulation pathway disorders
      predominate in males. They cause intramuscular or deep soft tissue
      haematomas. Bleeding onset after injury/surgery may be delayed 2–3 days.
      von Willebrand’s Disease The commonest congenital bleeding disorder,
      with VW Factor and Factor VIII deﬁciency, and abnormal platelet
      function. Clinically, the condition is similar to a platelet disorder, but
      milder. Bleeding is commonly mucosal (eg epistaxis) and usually treated
      with Factor VIII concentrate (which includes VW Factor).
      Haemophilia A Caused by a lack of functional factor VIII which is needed
      for clot formation. Often presents with bleeding into deep muscles, large
      joints or urinary tract. Intracranial bleeding is a major cause of death at all
      ages. Anticipate bleeding up to 3 days after trauma.
      In UK, haemophilia A associated with bleeding or potential bleeding is
      normally treated by Factor VIII concentrate (some patients have ‘home
      supplies’ and may bring them to hospital). The volume (dose) depends
      upon the severity of the haemophilia of the individual patient and the
      purpose of treatment (ie prophylaxis or therapy for current bleeding).
      Haemophilia B (Christmas disease) Involves a deﬁciency of Factor IX
      activity and is genetically and clinically indistinguishable from haemophilia
      A, but much less common. It is normally treated with factor IX
      concentrate.
                                                    BLEEDING DISORDERS: 2          169

Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Patients may present with DIC due to infection (especially Gram –ve
sepsis), trauma, malignancy, pregnancy (amniotic ﬂuid embolism, placental
abruption, toxaemia, retained products), any cause of shock, incompatible
blood transfusion or massive volume replacement. Following triggering of
the coagulation process, consumption of platelets, and coagulation factors
(particularly ﬁbrinogen, V, VIII, and XIII) occurs with thrombin formation
overwhelming the normal inhibition system, resulting in systemic ﬁbrin dep-
osition (Fig. 3.25). Activation of the ﬁbrinolytic system results in dissolution
of ﬁbrin and release of ﬁbrin degradation products.
Investigations Platelet count is usually d, INR i and APTT i, ﬁbrinogen
level d, ﬁbrin degradation products i.
Treatment Is complex and requires control of the primary cause of the
DIC to avoid total depletion of clotting factors. Obtain expert advice
about replacement therapy with platelets, FFP, prothrombin complex
concentrate, heparin and blood (particularly required if the patient is
actively bleeding).

       EXTRINSIC SYSTEM                         INTRINSIC SYSTEM

                            XII (on contact with vascular
                            endothelium)                              XIIa

  Tissue factor
  +VIII                                     XI                XIa
  +Ca2+

                                            IX                 Xa
                                                              +VIII
                                                              +Ca2+
                                                              +Phospholipid

            X                           Xa
                                       +V
                                       +Ca2+
                                       +Phospholipid

                                                                    XIII

       Prothrombin                   Thrombin

                                                                    XIIIa

                                       Fibrin               Cross linking
          Fibrinogen

Fig. 3.25 Coagulation cascade.
170    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Patients on anticoagulants
      The commonest oral anticoagulant is warfarin sodium, a vitamin K antago-
      nist. This inhibits the production of Factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX and
      X anded plasma levels of these factors. Patients, or their relatives, who
      are able to give a history will usually know if they are taking warfarin, and
      their most recent prothrombin time or INR test result, together with any
      changes in treatment.
      If this history is not available, suspect patients with prosthetic heart
      valves, mitral valve disease, AF, a past history of DVT/PE or TIAs to be
      on anticoagulants. Intercurrent illness, liver disease and changes in diet,
      and/or alcohol consumption may affect anticoagulant control. Concurrent
      drug administration with unrecognized potential for interaction is the
      commonest cause for acute changes in anticoagulant control.
      These patients usually present with one of three problems.
      Acute haemorrhage
      Spontaneous bleeding in patients on warfarin most commonly affects
      the GI tract, GU tract, joints, or muscles. After injury, expect excessive
      or continuing bleeding. Anticipate the i risks of occult or unrecognized
      bleeding (eg intraperitoneally or intracranially) after even minor trauma
      and maintain a high index of suspicion as to these possibilities.
      Check INR and FBC in all patients. Other investigations (eg CT scan of
      head/abdomen, USS) will be dictated by the nature of the acute problem.
      Patients with life-threatening haemorrhage
      For patients with life-threatening haemorrhage, commence volume
      replacement and blood transfusion as appropriate (see b Blood trans-
      fusion 1, p.172). Contact haematology for specialist advice which may
      include phytomenadione (vitamin K1) up to 10mg by slow IV injection and
      provision of prothrombin complex concentrate.
      Patients with less severe haemorrhage
      Patients with muscle haematomas, haematuria, or epistaxis also require
      hospital admission for observation and speciﬁc local treatment. Stop war-
      farin therapy for one or more days. Phytomenadione 0.5–2mg by slow IV
      injection may be advised by the haematologists. Note that vitamin K1 can
      interfere with warfarinization for several days, so take expert advice when
      the patient is also at high risk of thrombosis (prosthetic heart valve).
      INR levels within the therapeutic range
      Patients who develop bleeding with INR levels within the therapeutic
      range require investigation of a possible underlying cause (eg GI or GU
      tract pathology).
      See http://www.bcshguidelines.com
                                    PATIENTS ON ANTICOAGULANTS                171

Check of control of anticoagulation
The therapeutic range for the INR may vary according to the indication for
anticoagulation. An INR of 2.0–3.0 is usually appropriate for DVT prophy-
laxis and 3.0–4.0 for patients with mechanical prosthetic heart valves.
For patients who have INR 4.0–7.0 without haemorrhage, withhold warfarin
therapy for 1 or 2 days, and arrange review by appropriate specialist team
or GP. For patients with INR >7.0 without haemorrhage, withhold warfarin
and obtain specialist consultation before considering phytomenadione
(vitamin K1) 5mg by slow IV injection or orally.
Interactions with other prescribed or proprietary medicines
Many drugs can interfere with anticoagulant control. Before giving or
stopping any drug in a patient taking warfarin or other anticoagulant,
check the potential for interaction—Appendix I in the BNF.
Particular groups of drugs, likely to be prescribed in the ED, which may
cause problems include analgesics (especially NSAIDs), antibacterials and
anti-epileptics. Always LOOK IT UP.
Other oral anticoagulants
Dabigatran (a direct thrombin inhibitor) and rivaroxaban (a Factor Xa
inhibitor) are among a group of new oral anticoagulants which may be
prescribed instead of warfarin or low molecular weight heparin, in certain
conditions. They do not require routine blood monitoring. To date, there
are no guidelines for measuring their effect in patients who are bleeding,
and there is no proven way to reverse their effect. Always discuss bleeding
patients on new oral anticoagulants with a haematologist. Attempts at
reversal may include FFP or prothrombin complex concentrate.
172    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Blood transfusion 1
        It is better to stop bleeding than to have to replace blood loss
      General aspects
      Correctly documenting and labelling blood tubes and forms, combined
      with checking blood products prior to administration, is crucial for safe
      patient care. If a patient’s name(s), date of birth, clinical details and address
      are unknown or uncertain, identify them for transfusion purposes by a
      unique number (usually their unique ED number) and inform the blood
      transfusion laboratory.
      To avoid confusion, the doctor taking the blood sample must label and
      sign the tube at the patient’s bedside, complete the form, and contact
      the transfusion service. Only take blood from one patient at a time. Label
      tubes immediately to minimize the risk of mislabelling. Blood banks may
      refuse to handle incorrectly labelled forms/tubes.
      If you knowingly give a blood product (or animal product e.g. gelatin) to
      a patient whom you know would not accept this (eg a Jehovah’s Witness)
      you are likely to face an indefensible medicolegal claim.
      What to send
      10mL clotted blood is usually adequate for adults. Where it is obvious
      that massive transfusion may be required, send two 10mL samples. On the
      request form, indicate how much blood is needed, when and where the
      blood is to be sent. Date and sign the form.
      What to request
      The amount of blood to be delivered and to be kept available at the
      transfusion centre for immediate dispatch depends on the patient’s clinical
      state and assessment of future blood losses. Assessment of a patient with
      hypovolaemic shock is complex and includes recognition of the clinical
      situation, the potential blood loss, together with a current assessment
      of the patient and investigations. Hb and Hct values may be misleading.
      It may take hours for their values to equilibrate to those indicating the
      degree of blood loss.
      Group and screen The patient’s ABO and Rhesus D group is determined
      and the serum tested for unexpected red cell antibodies. Subsequently, if
      required, blood can be provided within 10–15min, assuming the antibody
      screen is clear. Request ‘Group and screen’ where a patient does not
      need transfusion in the ED, but may require it later.
      Cross-match Full blood compatibility testing may take up to 1hr. If blood
      is required more urgently, ABO and Rh compatible units can usually be
      provided within 15min, including an ‘immediate spin cross-match’ as a ﬁnal
      check on ABO compatibility. In exsanguinating haemorrhage, uncross-
      matched group O Rhesus –ve blood can be issued immediately.
                                               BLOOD TRANSFUSION 1             173

Blood products
The UK uses blood component therapy. There appears to be no speciﬁc
advantage in using ‘whole’ blood as opposed to red cells plus a volume
expander.
Red cells (additive solution) Each pack (volume 300mL) is from a single
donor and has a Hct of 0.65–0.75 (0.55–0.65 for RBCs in additive solution).
A transfusion of 4mL/kg will i circulating Hb by 81g/dL.
Whole blood A ‘unit’ contains 530mL (470mL of blood from a single
donor + 63mL preservative solution), with a Hct of 0.35–0.45.
Platelet concentrate either pooled or from a single donor by platelet
pheresis.
Fresh frozen plasma contains clotting factors and ﬁbrinogen.
Cryoprecipitate is derived from FFP when it is thawed. It is rich in factor
VIII, ﬁbrinogen, and von Willebrand Factor.
Prothrombin complex concentrate is a combination of vitamin K
dependent Factors II, VII, IX and X. Use PCC to reverse warfarin.
Transfusion precautions (UK Blood Safety & Quality
Regulations 2005)
• 2 practitioners must conﬁrm all the following steps before commencing
  transfusion. If there is ANY discrepancy, DO NOT transfuse.
• Conﬁrm the details on the traceability label on the blood component
  match the patient’s full name, date of birth, and hospital number (wrist
  band if unconscious).
• Check that the traceability label is attached to the blood bag.
• Ensure the donation number, the patient’s blood group/RhD type all
  match and that any special requirements are covered.
• Check every component before starting transfusion for signs of discol-
  ouration, leaks, clots etc. and the expiry date.
• If all checks are satisfactory, the 2 practitioners should ensure that the
  component has been prescribed (prescription form and/or ﬂuid balance
  chart) and sign the front of the traceability label before commencing the
  transfusion.
• Infuse all components through a giving set with integral ﬁlter to trap
  large aggregates. Microaggregate ﬁlters are not routinely required.
• Never add any drug to a blood component infusion.
• Do not use giving-sets which previously contained glucose or gelatin.
• Red cell concentrates may be diluted with 0.9% saline using a Y giving-
  set to improve ﬂow rates. Never add any other solution.
• Use a blood warmer, especially for large and/or rapid transfusions.
• Once the transfusion has started, peel off the portion of the signed label
  and attach to the appropriate place in the ﬂuid balance sheet.
• Sign the prescription form to conﬁrm the patient identity checks.
• Complete and sign the label and return it to the laboratory.
See: www.transfusionguidelines.org.uk
174    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Blood transfusion 2
      Massive transfusion
      Loss of 50% of circulating blood volume within 3hr is perhaps the most
      relevant ED deﬁnition. Resuscitation requires an interdisciplinary team
      and clear organization.
      In the event of massive blood loss
      • Protect the airway and give high ﬂow O2.
      • Get help—two nurses and a senior doctor.
      • Insert two large bore cannulae and start IV warm saline 1000mL stat.
      • Take FBC, U&E, LFTs, coagulation, and cross-match. Label the blood
         tubes and ensure they are sent directly to the laboratory. Do not leave
         them unlabelled or lying around in the resusitation room.
      • Telephone the haematology laboratory to warn of potential massive
         transfusion. Request ABO group-speciﬁc red cells if the patient is peri-
         arrest. This will take only 10min in the laboratory. Otherwise, request
         full cross-match and give number of units required.
      • Accurate patient ID is essential, even if the patient is unknown.
      • Call appropriate senior surgeon—to stop bleeding as soon as possible.
      • Start blood transfusion if the patient remains tachycardic and/or hypo-
         tensive despite crystalloid resuscitation.
      • Repeat all bloods, including FBC, clotting, U&Es, calcium, and magne-
         sium levels, every hour.
      • Start platelet transfusion if platelet count falls below 75 × 109/L.
      • Anticipate the requirement for FFP and consider giving early during
         the resuscitation. FFP will replace clotting factors and ﬁbrinogen. Aim
         to maintain ﬁbrinogen >1.0g/L and the INR and APTT <1.5 normal.
         Cryoprecipitate may also be used.
      • Recombinant Factor VIIa might be used as a ‘last ditch attempt’ to
         control bleeding in young patients where surgical control of bleeding
         is not possible, and the above has already been corrected. If the drug is
         available it is usually ordered by a haematologist.
      Massive transfusion complications
      Rapid infusion of blood products may lead to:
      Hypothermia Blood products are normally stored at 2–6°C. Rapid
      infusion can cause signiﬁcant hypothermia. Use blood warmers routinely
      for rapid transfusions (eg >50mL/kg/hr or 15mL/kg/hr in children). Never
      warm a blood product by putting a pack into hot water, on a radiator or
      any other heat source.
      Electrolyte disturbances With massive transfusion, the citrate anticoagulant
      may cause signiﬁcant toxicity, d plasma Ca2+ (impairing cardiac function)
      and acid–base balance disturbance. This is aggravated in patients with
      underlying liver disease, hypotension or hypothermia. Citrate may also
      bind Mg2+, causing arrhythmias. Prophylactic or routine administration of
      IV calcium salts is not recommended. Monitor ECG and measure ionized
      plasma Ca2+ levels during massive transfusion. K+ levels i in stored blood
      and hyperkalaemia may follow massive infusion. Routinely monitor the
      ECG and check plasma K+ levels. Transient hypokalaemia may follow 24hr
      after large volume transfusion
                                               BLOOD TRANSFUSION 2             175

Blood product administration
Blood transfusion is not a panacea. An improvement in O2 delivery cannot
be assumed. RBC function deteriorates during storage and changes in O2
afﬁnity occur withed 2,3-DPG levels, while d ATP levels alter RBC mem-
brane deformability causing i cell stiffness and micro-circulatory problems.
UK donations are routinely screened for hepatitis B, HIV, HTLV, syphilis,
and where necessary, CMV. However, blood cannot be sterilized: small
but deﬁnite risks of infection transmission exist.
Transfusion reactions
Monitor the patient closely for the ﬁrst 5–10min of the infusion of each
unit of blood to detect early clinical evidence of acute reactions. If the
patient develops a temperature, shortness of breath, chest or abdom-
inal pain or hypotension, suspect a transfusion reaction. Treat allergic
reactions including itching, urticaria, bronchospasm and fever convention-
ally (see b Anaphylaxis treatment, p.43).
Mismatched transfusion By far the commonest cause is a clerical error
when labelling, ordering or administering blood. Transfusion of ABO
incompatible blood causes acute severe haemolysis and circulatory
collapse. In a hypovolaemic, shocked, or anaesthetized patient these
features may be obscured and missed.
If a transfusion reaction is suspected:
ABO incompatability, haemolytic reaction, bacterial infection, severe
allergic reaction, or transfusion-related acute lung injury:
• Stop the transfusion.
• Keep the IV line open with 0.9% saline.
• Record all observations, give supplemental oxygen.
• Double-check the blood unit label with the patient’s wrist identity band
   and other identiﬁers.
• Send the unit of blood product and the giving set to the blood bank.
• Take 40mL of blood. Send it as follows:
    • 5mL anticoagulated and 5mL clotted blood to blood bank;
    • 10mL for U&E;
    • 10mL for coagulation screening;
    • 10mL for blood cultures.
• Contact the blood bank directly by phone.
• Contact haematologist directly.
• Give broad spectrum antibiotic if infection suspected.
• Monitor ﬂuid balance and urinary output.
176    CHAPTER 3 Medicine

      Sickle cell disease
      Sickle cell disease occurs in African, Indian, Middle Eastern, Caribbean,
      USA, and Mediterranean populations. It is caused by a genetic mutation in
      one of the chains of the Hb molecule. The normal adult Hb genotype AA
      produces HbA. In heterozygotes (sickle cell trait) one gene is abnormal
      (HbAS) and about 40% of the patient’s Hb will be HbS. In homozygotes
      (sickle cell anaemia), both genes are abnormal (SS) and >80% of the Hb
      will be HbS. HbS molecules polymerize in deoxygenated or acidotic con-
      ditions, causing RBC sickling. Sickle cells are rigid and fragile. They may
      haemolyse, or block small vessels leading to tissue ischaemia, infarction
      and further sickling (see Fig. 3.26). Sickling also occurs with genes coding
      other analogous amino acid substitutions (eg HbSC and SD diseases).
      Clinical features
      Sickle cell trait causes no disability except during conditions of severe
      hypoxia (eg sudden depressurization in aircraft, or cardiac arrest).
      Patients with sickle cell anaemia have chronic anaemia (Hb 8–10g/dL) with
      alternating good health and acute crises. Later, chronic ill health supervenes
      with renal failure, bone necrosis (evident in 50% of patients by age 35
      years), osteomyelitis, leg ulcers and iron overload as a consequence of
      transfusions. There is predisposition to infection, especially Staphylococcus,
      Pneumococcus, and Haemophilus.
      Sickle cell crises can occur de novo or follow infection, cold, dehydration,
      or any situation where tissue hypoxia/ischaemia occurs. The crisis may
      involve thrombosis, haemolysis, marrow aplasia, or acute splenic/liver
      sequestration (especially in children aged <5 years). Any acute medical
      or surgical emergency may be mimicked (eg acute abdomen, PE, stroke).
      Severe aching bony pain and low-grade fever (even in the absence
      of infection) is common. Cerebral sickling may present with bizarre
      behaviour, psychosis, ﬁts, TIAs, stroke, or other focal neurological signs.
      Priapism, jaundice, and painful swelling of hands and feet may occur.
      Acute chest syndrome
      The leading cause of death in sickle cell anaemia. It presents as chest pain,
      hypoxia and pulmonary inﬁltrates. There may be cough, tachypnoea, and
      wheezing. Poorly understood, but infection may be a precipitant.
      Acute splenic sequestration
      Sudden trapping of large numbers of RBCs in the spleen results in severe
      anaemia, an enlarging spleen, hypovolaemia, and thrombocytopenia. It
      occurs most commonly in young children—those with sickle cell disease
      have a 30% chance of having acute splenic sequestration by the age of 5
      years. It may present with shock and splenomegaly, with a mortality of
      >15%.
      Osteomyelitis and septic arthritis
      Osteomyelitis and septic arthritis occur more commonly in sickle cell
      disease. Be suspicious if a patient presents with high fever, soft tissue
      swelling, or pain in a different pattern to normal. Salmonella is frequently
      implicated.
                                                       SICKLE CELL DISEASE          177

Investigations
No speciﬁc tests can detect a sickle cell crisis:
• All patients in the at-risk groups require a sickle test before any anaesthetic
  procedure (including regional anaesthesia, Bier’s block).
• Sickle testing (using an oxidizing agent) will detect sickling in homo- and
  heterozygote forms. Hb electrophoresis can then distinguish between
  HbSS, HbAS and other Hb variants.
• FBC typically shows anaemia (Hb 6–8g/dL, but Hb may be much lower if
  acute haemolysis, sequestration or aplasia is present). Post-splenectomy
  features may be seen on blood ﬁlm. WCC may be i (20–60 × 109/L) in
  the absence of infection and platelet count is also usually i.
• Infection screen, including blood cultures, midstream specimen of urine
  (MSU) and CXR.
• Joint aspiration for culture if septic arthritis is suspected.
• U&E, ABG, ECG.
• Arrange CT brain scan if there are neurological symptoms or signs.
Management of crises
Provide supportive therapy, directed to the patient’s symptoms:
• Get expert help!
• Keep the patient warm, rested and give O2 if any obvious symptoms or
  SpO2 <94%.
• Opioids (given IV and titrated to the response) are often required for
  pain. Consider morphine IVI or patient analgesia pump.
• Commence rehydration with oral or IV ﬂuids, but take care not to pre-
  cipitate heart failure.
• Transfusion may be required if severe anaemia from acute haemolysis,
  sequestration or aplasia occurs, or if there are central nervous system
  (CNS) or lung complications.
Empirical antibiotic therapy may be required if infection is thought to be
the trigger for the sickling crisis.

                                   Sickling

                                                         Blood viscosity
       Deoxygenation
        and acidosis

                                                         Sludging

                                    Stasis
Fig. 3.26 Sickling cycle.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 4                                 179

Toxicology

Poisons: general principles          180
Diagnosis of poisoning               182
Poisons: supportive care             183
Reducing absorption of poison        184
Antidotes for poisons                186
Opioid poisoning                     188
Salicylate poisoning                 189
Paracetamol poisoning                190
Tricyclic antidepressant poisoning   194
Benzodiazepine poisoning             196
Clomethiazole poisoning              196
Phenothiazine poisoning              196
Barbiturate poisoning                197
Lithium poisoning                    197
Sulphonylurea poisoning              197
Beta-blocker poisoning               198
Calcium antagonist poisoning         198
Digoxin poisoning                    199
ACE inhibitor poisoning              199
Theophylline poisoning               200
Salbutamol poisoning                 200
Iron poisoning                       201
Ethanol poisoning                    202
Methanol poisoning                   202
Ethylene glycol poisoning            203
Paraquat poisoning                   204
Petrol and parafﬁn poisoning         205
Organophosphate poisoning            206
Cyanide poisoning                    207
Carbon monoxide poisoning            208
Chlorine poisoning                   209
CS gas (tear gas)                    209
Chemical incidents                   210
Decontamination of patients          211
Plants, berries and mushrooms        212
Button batteries                     213
Illicit drugs                        214
Serotonin syndrome                   216
Body packers                         217
180    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Poisons: general principles
      Emergency treatment
      Clear and maintain the Airway.
      If Breathing appears inadequate ventilate with oxygen using a bag and mask
      or ET tube (not mouth-to-mouth in poisoned patients). Give naloxone for
      respiratory depression due to opioids (b p. 188).
      Circulation Check pulse. If unconscious and pulseless, start CPR.
      Types of poisoning
      Unintentional or ‘accidental’ poisoning is most common in inquisitive
      small children (1–4 years) who eat tablets, household chemicals, and
      plants. Older children and adults may be poisoned by chemicals at school
      or work, or by drinking toxic ﬂuids decanted into drinks bottles. Poisoning
      by drugs may result from miscalculation or confusion of doses or by taking
      the same drug under different names. Drug smugglers who swallow drugs
      wrapped in condoms or polythene, or stuff them in the rectum or vagina,
      may suffer poisoning if the packages leak (b p.217).
      Deliberate self-poisoning is the commonest form of poisoning in adults and
      may occur in children as young as 6yrs (usually with a family history of self-
      poisoning). Drugs or poisons are often taken impulsively, sometimes to
      manipulate relatives or friends. Suicidal intent is relatively uncommon, but
      assess all patients for this (b p.612). A few patients leave suicide notes,
      and conceal the drugs or poison to evade detection.
      Non-accidental poisoning of children is a form of fabricated or induced
      illness (previously known as Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy—b
      p.733), in which a parent deliberately poisons a child. Homicidal poisoning
      is rare and may involve acute or chronic poisoning with chemicals such as
      arsenic or thallium.
      Chemical plant incidents and terrorism are potential threats to large
      numbers of people.
      Information about poisons
      Tablets may be identiﬁed from MIMS Colour Index and descriptions in
      the BNF. Drug Information Centres and Poisons Information Services
      (see opposite) have access to TICTAC, a computer-aided tablet and capsule
      identiﬁcation system (www.tictac.org.uk).
      Martindale1 gives information on many drugs and poisons, and detailed
      constituents of non-prescription drugs.
      Identiﬁcation of plants and fungi from reference books may be difﬁcult,
      especially if only vague descriptions or chewed fragments are available.
      The CD-ROM computer software Poisonous Plants and Fungi in Britain
      and Ireland 2 helps with identiﬁcation and details of toxicity. Local botanic
      gardens may provide additional help. See also b p.212.
      1 Sweetman SC (ed). (2009) Martindale: The Complete Drug Reference, 36th edn. Pharmaceutical
        Press, London.
      2 Dauncey EA et al. (2002) Poisonous Plants and Fungi in Britain and Ireland (interactive identiﬁcation
        system on CD-ROM), 2nd edn. Kew Publishing, Kew, www.kewbooks.com.
                                        POISONS: GENERAL PRINCIPLES             181

Poisons Information Centres in the UK
TOXBASE, the UK National Poisons Information Service’s database on
clinical toxicology, is on the internet (www.toxbase.org) with a backup
site at www.toxbasebackup.org. It includes information about poisoning
with drugs, household products, plants and fungi, as well as industrial and
agricultural chemicals and agents which might be deliberately released by
terrorists. Access to TOXBASE is password protected and is restricted to
NHS professional staff in the UK and also hospitals in Ireland.
TOXBASE or reference books provide sufﬁcient information for most
cases of poisoning. More detailed information and specialist advice is
available from Poisons Information Centres and is especially useful for
complex cases or severe poisoning.
The UK National Poisons Information Service has four centres, with a single
telephone number 0844 892 0111 which directs the call to the nearest
centre, or to the on-call centre out of hours. In Ireland advice is available
from the National Poisons Information Centre, Dublin, telephone (01)
809 2566.
Enquiries to Poisons Information Centres are usually answered initially by an
information ofﬁcer using TOXBASE and other reference sources. Medical
staff with specialist toxicology experience are available for advice about
seriously poisoned patients. Poisons Information Centres can also advise
about sources of supply of antidotes that are needed only occasionally, and
about laboratory analyses that may be helpful in managing some patients.
Admission and psychiatric assessment after poisoning
Adults
Patients who are seriously poisoned need admission to a medical ward,
or if appropriate, to ICU. However, most patients who take overdoses
suffer no serious ill effects and may be treated satisfactorily on an ED
observation ward or a Clinical Decisions Unit. Even if there is no risk of
toxicity, admission overnight provides a ‘cooling off’ period for the patient
to get away from the situation that precipitated the overdose. This should
allow a more rational appraisal of the problems and may reduce the risk
of further self-poisoning.
Look for the causes of every episode of deliberate self-harm. A patient
who seems suicidal (see b p.612) must be observed carefully in the ED
and on the ward, because of the risk of further self-harm.
Children with poisoning
Serious poisoning is uncommon in children. Many children appear well
but have been exposed to an unknown amount of a compound which
could be toxic. Admit such children to a paediatric ward for observation:
they can be discharged after a few hours if no toxic effects occur. A child
may be discharged home directly from the ED if the substance taken is
known to be non-toxic. The health visitor may usefully visit the home
to advise about poisoning prevention. In children >6 years, consider the
possibility of deliberate self-harm and the need for assessment by a child
psychiatrist.
182    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Diagnosis of poisoning
      The patient or relatives/friends may state what drugs or poison have been
      taken, but this information is not always accurate. Self-poisoning is often
      an impulsive act whilst under the inﬂuence of alcohol: the patient may not
      know which tablets he/she took. The amount involved is often unclear.
      Check any bottles or packets for the names and quantities of drugs or
      poisons that were available. If a patient is unconscious or severely poi-
      soned, look in hospital notes for details of previous overdoses, and ﬁnd
      out from the GP what drugs had been prescribed. Record the time of
      ingestion of the drug or poison. Examine the patient all over for signs of
      poisoning, injection marks or self-injury. Exclude other diverse processes
      mimicking poisoning (eg head injury, meningitis). In the Far East, and in
      EDs where Asian people present with non-speciﬁc symptoms, hepatitis,
      or suspected poisoning, remember that traditional Chinese medicines or
      herbs can cause signiﬁcant toxicity.
      Toxidromes: features suggesting a particular poison
      • Coma with dilated pupils, divergent squint, tachycardia, i muscle tone,
        i reﬂexes and extensor plantars suggests tricyclic antidepressant or
        orphenadrine poisoning (b p.194).
      • Coma with hypotension, respiratory depression and d muscle tone
        suggests barbiturates, clomethiazole (b p.196), benzodiazepines with
        alcohol, or severe tricyclic antidepressant poisoning (b p.194).
      • Coma with slow respiration and pinpoint pupils is typical of opioid
        poisoning (give naloxone, b p.188).
      • Tinnitus, deafness, hyperventilation, sweating, nausea and tachycardia
        are typical of salicylate poisoning (b p.189).
      • Agitation, tremor, dilated pupils, tachycardia, suggest amphetamines,
        ecstasy, cocaine, sympathomimetics (b p.214), tricyclic antidepressants
        (b p.194), or selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (b p.216).
      Assessment and monitoring
      • Assess and record conscious level (b p.361). Observe frequently.
      • Check blood glucose in patients with confusion, coma or ﬁts.
      • Monitor breathing and record respiratory rate. Use a pulse oximeter,
        but note that SpO2 may be misleadingly high in carbon monoxide (CO)
        poisoning—see b p.208).
      • Check ABG if patient is deeply unconscious or breathing abnormally.
      • Record and monitor the ECG if a patient is unconscious, has tachy- or
        bradycardia or has taken drugs or poisons with risk of arrhythmias.
      • Record BP and temperature.
      Investigations in poisoned patients
      The most useful investigations are paracetamol and salicylate levels, blood
      glucose, ABG, and urea & electrolytes (U&E). Measure paracetamol if
      there is any possibility of paracetamol poisoning (this includes all uncon-
      scious patients). Record the time of the sample on the bottle, and in the
      notes. Many labs can measure salicylate, iron and lithium and also check
      for paraquat if necessary. Comprehensive drug screening is rarely needed
      and is only available in specialist centres (ask Poisons Information Service,
      b p.181).
                                            POISONS: SUPPORTIVE CARE             183

Poisons: supportive care
Protect the airway
In an unconscious patient use a cuffed ET tube if there is no gag reﬂex. If
an oral or nasal airway is used, nurse in the recovery position to minimize
risk of aspiration should vomiting or regurgitation occur.
Monitor breathing and ventilate if necessary
Hypoxia and CO2 retention are common in deep coma.
Hypotension
This may result from relative hypovolaemia, arrhythmias and cardio-
depressive effects of drugs. Treat according to the cause. Elevate the foot
of the trolley. If BP <90mmHg, consider giving saline or a plasma expander
such as gelatin 500mL IV. Monitor CVP in patients who are elderly or have
cardiac disease. Inotropes such as dopamine (2–5micrograms/kg/min), dob-
utamine (2.5–10micrograms/kg/min), glucagon (b p.198) or insulin therapy
(b p.187) are occasionally needed, under expert guidance.
Cardiac arrhythmias
Generally rare in poisoned patients. The most likely drugs responsible are
tricyclic antidepressants, beta-blockers, chloral hydrate, digoxin, potassium,
bronchodilators, verapamil, and amphetamines. Look for and correct hypoxia,
respiratory depression, metabolic acidosis and electrolyte abnormalities.
Anti-arrhythmic drugs are very rarely needed: consult a poisons expert ﬁrst.
Convulsions
Dangerous because they cause hypoxia and acidosis, and may precipi-
tate cardiac arrest. Drugs responsible include tricyclic antidepressants,
mefenamic acid, and theophylline. Check for and correct hypoxia and
hypoglycaemia. Do not give anticonvulsants if ﬁts are single and brief, but
if ﬁts are repeated or prolonged give IV lorazepam 4mg (or PR diazepam
or buccal midazolam if venous access is not available).
Hypothermia
May occur with any drug causing coma, especially barbiturates,
clomethiazole, and phenothiazines. Check rectal T° with a low-reading
thermometer. Insulation and passive rewarming are usually adequate.
Hyperthermia (b p.264)
May occur with amphetamines, cocaine, ecstasy, monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, sympathomimetics, and theophylline. Convulsions and rhab-
domyolysis are common. Active cooling, chlorpromazine and possibly
dantrolene are needed. Get expert help.
Complications of immobility
Prolonged immobility (eg due to tricyclics and barbiturates) risks pressure
areas. Treat blisters like minor burns. Immobility may cause rhabdomyolysis
(leading to renal failure), nerve palsies, and compartment syndrome: if this
is suspected check CK, test urine for myoglobinuria, and get urgent ortho-
paedic advice about measuring compartment pressures.
Urinary retention
Common in coma, especially after tricyclic poisoning. Suprapubic pressure
often stimulates reﬂex bladder emptying. Catheterization may be needed
to empty the bladder or to measure urine output.
184    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Reducing absorption of poison
      Background information
      If a poison has been swallowed it is logical to try to remove it and reduce
      absorption from the gut. Possible measures include gastric lavage, induced
      emesis (eg with ipecacuanha), oral adsorbents (especially activated
      charcoal) and whole-bowel irrigation. None of these can be recom-
      mended routinely. They may cause signiﬁcant morbidity and there is very
      little evidence that they improve outcomes.
      Gastric lavage
      This does not empty the stomach of solids and may force gastric contents
      through the pylorus into the small bowel. It may cause hypoxia, aspiration
      pneumonia and occasionally oesophageal perforation. Gastric lavage
      >1hr after overdose is ineffective in d absorption of poisons. Gastric
      lavage does not reduce mortality from poisoning, and it does not deter
      patients from taking repeated overdoses.
      Practical advice on use of gastric lavage
      Only consider this if the patient has taken a life-threatening amount of
      poison within the previous 1 hour or is deeply unconscious because of
      poisoning. Only consider performing it if there is a strong cough reﬂex
      or the airway is protected by a cuffed ET tube. Do not use lavage for
      poisoning with corrosives (risk of perforation) or with petrol/parafﬁn
      compounds (risk of pneumonitis), except rarely in severe poisoning on
      specialist advice.
      • Before starting gastric lavage, check that powerful suction is immedi-
        ately available.
      • Elevate the foot of the trolley and place the patient in the left lateral
        position.
      • Give O2 via nasal cannulae. Monitor ECG.
      • Lubricate large disposable stomach tube (36 or 40 French Gauge-FG)
        and pass it through the mouth into the stomach. Conﬁrm position by
        aspirating gastric contents or blowing air down the tube while listening
        over the stomach.
      • Aspirate gastric contents and keep labelled sample for later analysis if
        necessary.
      • Perform lavage by pouring 300mL aliquots of tepid tap water down
        the tube and siphoning it back, while massaging over stomach to help
        dislodge tablet debris.
      • Continue until the efﬂuent is clear.
      • Consider leaving activated charcoal (50g) in the stomach.
      • While withdrawing the tube, occlude it between the ﬁngers to prevent
        aspiration of ﬂuid from the tube.
                                  REDUCING ABSORPTION OF POISON                 185

Induced emesis
Never use emetics. Ipecacuanha was once used frequently, but it may
cause prolonged vomiting, drowsiness and aspiration pneumonia, and it
does not reduce drug absorption. There is no indication for using ipecac.
Salt solutions may cause fatal hypernatraemia and must never be used as
an emetic.
Activated charcoal
Given within 1hr, this d absorption of therapeutic doses of many drugs,
but there is little evidence of clinical beneﬁt after overdose. Charcoal d
the half-life of some drugs (eg digoxin), which undergo entero-hepatic
recycling. However, charcoal is messy, unpleasant to take and often causes
vomiting. Aspiration into the lungs can result in fatal pneumonitis. Various
formulations of activated charcoal are available. Actidose Aqua Advance®
is less unpalatable than some of the other formulations. Carbomix® may
cause severe constipation, especially if given in repeated doses.
Do not give activated charcoal for substances which do not bind to it.
These include: iron, lithium, boric acid, cyanide, ethanol, ethylene glycol,
methanol, organophosphates, petroleum distillates and strong acids and
alkalis. Charcoal is most likely to be useful for poisons which are toxic in
small quantities (eg tricyclic antidepressants and theophylline derivatives).
If a dangerous overdose has been taken in the previous 1hr, give charcoal
(PO or via an orogastric tube: adult 50g; child 1g/kg, max 50g). Charcoal
may be effective for >1hr for sustained release formulations or drugs that
delay gastric emptying (eg tricyclic antidepressants and opioids). Obtain
expert advice before giving charcoal in repeated doses, which are only
helpful in life-threatening poisoning with a few drugs (eg carbamazepine,
dapsone, digoxin, phenobarbital, quinine, theophylline, and salicylate, and
a few other drugs rarely taken in overdose).
Whole-bowel irrigation
Whole-bowel irrigation is rarely needed and should only be used on
expert advice. The aim of whole-bowel irrigation is to empty the bowel
rapidly of solid contents by giving ﬂuid down a nasogastric (NG) tube
until the rectal efﬂuent becomes clear. The value of this is uncertain. It
may be useful for poisoning with sustained-release drug formulations or
for poisons such as iron or lithium, which are not absorbed by activated
charcoal. It has also been used to remove packets of cocaine from body
packers and button batteries from children.
Bowel cleansing solutions of polyethylene glycol and electrolytes
(eg Klean-Prep®) should be used for whole-bowel irrigation: 2L/hr in
adults (500mL/hr in small children) for 2hr, or occasionally longer. Do not
use normal saline since it may cause ﬂuid overload and hypokalaemia.
Activated charcoal may be given by NG tube, if appropriate, before whole-
bowel irrigation is started. Continue the irrigation until the rectal efﬂuent
is clear. Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and electrolyte disturbances
may occur. Monitor ECG, U&E and urine output.
186    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Antidotes for poisons
      The provision of supportive care is essential in all patients. Antidotes are
      available for only a few drugs and poisons (Table 4.1), and are not always
      necessary. More information is available from reference books, TOXBASE
      and Poisons Information Centres (b p.181).
      Table 4.1
      Poison                   Antidote                          Notes
      Beta-blockers            Glucagon, atropine                b p.198
      Carbon monoxide          Oxygen                            b p.208
      Cyanide                  Sodium nitrite, sodium          b p.207
                               thiosulphate, dicobalt edetate,
                               hydroxocobalamin
      Digoxin                  Digoxin antibodies (Digibind)† b p.199
      Ethylene glycol          Ethanol, fomepizole†              b p.203
      Iron salts               Desferrioxamine                   b p.201
      Local anaesthetics       Lipid emulsion (Intralipid®   )   b p.187, b p.284
      Methanol                 Ethanol, fomepizole†              b p.202
      Opioids                  Naloxone                          b p.188
      Organophosphates         Atropine, pralidoxime†            b p.206
      Paracetamol              Acetylcysteine, methionine        b p.190
      Sulphonylureas           Glucose, octreotide               b p.197
      Tricyclic antidepressants Sodium bicarbonate, Intralipid® b p.187, b p.194
      Warfarin                 Vitamin K, clotting factors, FFP b p.170
      Adder bites              Zagreb antivenom                  b p.417
      Foreign snakes           Antivenoms†                       Expert advice b p.181

      Antidotes are also available for arsenic, lead, mercury, thallium, and other
      metals. Specialist advice is essential.
      Some antidotes (marked†) are very rarely needed: get expert advice
      (b p.181) about when and how to use these antidotes and where to
      obtain them.
      Increasing elimination of poisons
      The vast majority of poisoned patients recover with supportive care, plus
      appropriate antidotes if necessary. Active removal of absorbed poison is
      only needed in special circumstances. Alkalinization of the urine is useful
      in salicylate poisoning (b p.189), but forced alkaline diuresis is no longer
      recommended. Haemodialysis is occasionally helpful for severe poisoning
      with salicylates, ethylene glycol, methanol, lithium, phenobarbital, and
      chlorates. Haemoperfusion is rarely needed, but might be helpful in severe
      poisoning with barbiturates, chloral hydrate or theophylline: specialist
      advice is essential.
                                                          ANTIDOTES FOR POISONS                     187

Lipid emulsion (Intralipid®) therapy for drug toxicity
IV lipid emulsion is rarely needed but can be lifesaving in overdoses
of local anaesthetics such as lidocaine or bupivacaine (b p.284).1,2,3
It may be useful in cardiac arrest caused by some other drugs: the indi-
cations are unclear but case reports record dramatic recovery from
cardiac arrests due to haloperidol, verapamil, and a mixed overdose of
bupropion and lamotrigine.1,2 In animals,2 lipid emulsion was effective
in poisoning from verapamil (but not nifedipine) and clomipramine (but
not amitriptyline). Consider lipid emulsion in drug-induced cardiac arrest
unresponsive to standard treatment (b p.50). EDs, theatres, and ICU
should stock lipid emulsion for this emergency.
Lipid emulsion acts as a ‘lipid sink’, binding lipophilic drugs and reducing
the amount of active free drug. It may also affect myocardial metabolism.
Lipid emulsion is not licensed for use in drug overdose and the safety of
rapid infusion is unknown. Lipid interferes with analysis of blood samples,
so if possible take these before starting lipid emulsion, including blood for
later measurement of drug concentrations.
Give Intralipid® 20% 1.5mL/kg IV over 1min, then 15mL/kg/hr by intrave-
nous infusion (IVI) (for a 70kg patient give 100mL over 1min, then 500mL
over 30min). Continue CPR. If the circulation is still inadequate after 5min
repeat IV bolus of Intralipid® 1.5mL/kg twice at 5min intervals and increase
IVI to 30mL/kg/hr (500mL in 15min for 70kg). The maximum recommended
total dose of Intralipid® 20% is 12mL/kg (840mL for a 70kg patient).3
Report cases in which lipid emulsion is used to the Poisons Information
Service (b p.181) or the Lipid Registry (http://www.lipidregistry.org).
Insulin therapy in poisoning
Poisoning with cardiac drugs such as calcium channel blockers (b p.198)
and B-blockers (b p.198) may cause severe hypotension. If standard treat-
ments are ineffective, get expert advice (b p.181) and consider using insulin
therapy, which may improve myocardial carbohydrate metabolism and i BP
and cardiac output. Some case reports and animal studies of severe calcium
channel blocker and B-blocker poisoning have shown beneﬁts from high
dose insulin, but the optimum dosage is unclear.4, 5
Continuous monitoring is needed, with invasive BP monitoring. Check blood
glucose and potassium at least hourly and give glucose 10% and potassium
(max 20mmol/hr) as needed. Give an IV bolus of short-acting insulin 1 unit/
kg, then 0.5–2units/kg/hr IVI, titrated to keep systolic BP > 90mmHg and
heart rate >60/min. In extreme cases, consider increasing insulin dosage to
5–10units/kg/hr, titrated according to response.
1 http://lipidrescue.squarespace.com
2 Jamaty C et al. (2010) Lipid emulsions in the treatment of acute poisoning: a systematic review
  of human and animal studies. Clin Toxicol 48: 1–27.
3 Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (2010) Management of Severe Local
  Anaesthetic Toxicity. Available at: http://www.aagbi.org/publications/guidelines.htm
4 Lheureux PER et al. (2006) Bench-to-bedside review: Hyperinsulinaemia/euglycaemia therapy
  in the management of overdose of calcium-channel blockers. Critical Care 10: 212. Available at:
  http://ccforum.com/content/10/3/212
5 Nickson CP, Little M (2009) Early use of high-dose insulin euglycaemic therapy for verapamil
  toxicity. Med J Aust 191(6): 350–2.
188    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Opioid poisoning
      The opioids include morphine, diamorphine (heroin), pethidine, codeine,
      buprenorphine, nalbuphine, methadone, diphenoxylate, and related drugs.
      These are used as analgesics (sometimes combined with paracetamol, as
      in co-codamol and co-proxamol), cough suppressants and anti-diarrhoeal
      agents. Acute opioid poisoning often occurs in addicts (who may have
      needle marks and thrombosed veins and a high risk of HIV and hepatitis).
      Clinical features
      Opioid poisoning causes coma, d respiratory rate, pinpoint pupils, and
      sometimes cyanosis, apnoea, convulsions and hypotension. Hypertension
      may occur in pentazocine poisoning. Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
      may result from ‘main-lining’ heroin or other opioids.
      Respiratory depression may cause death within 1hr of an opioid overdose.
      However, delayed respiratory depression can occur in poisoning with
      co-phenotrope (diphenoxylate and atropine), in which the opioid effects
      usually predominate over atropine toxicity. Delayed toxicity may occur
      with slow-release formulations of drugs, and also with methadone, which
      has a very long duration of action (half-life 25–50hr).
      Treatment
      Clear and maintain the airway. If breathing appears inadequate, ventilate
      on O2 with a bag and mask or ET tube. Naloxone is a speciﬁc antago-
      nist for opioids and reverses coma and respiratory depression if given in
      sufﬁcient dosage. Naloxone may be used as a therapeutic trial in sus-
      pected opioid poisoning: record coma level, pupil size and respiratory
      rate and check for any response. The usual initial dose of naloxone for
      adults is 0.8mg IV, repeated at 2–3min intervals if necessary. However, in
      known or suspected drug addicts it is best to avoid reversing the opioid
      completely, so start with 0.1mg IV (or intranasal, if there is no venous
      access) and repeat this at 2–3min intervals until the patient is breathing
      adequately, but still drowsy. For children, give 10 micrograms/kg (IV, IM
      or IN), repeated as necessary. Intranasal naloxone is given by dripping or
      spraying the IV solution into the nose, where it is absorbed rapidly.
      Naloxone has a much shorter duration of action than most opioids and
      so coma and respiratory depression often recur when naloxone wears
      off. The mean half-life of naloxone is 62min, but in some patients the
      half-life is >5hr. Careful observation is essential. More naloxone is often
      needed, given IV, by IVI or IM, the dose adjusted depending on the
      response (occasionally as much as 75mg in 24hr in methadone poisoning).
      Observation is needed for 6hr after the last dose of naloxone. Patients
      at risk of respiratory depression should not be allowed to leave hospital:
      rather than reversing an opioid fully it is better to keep a patient sedated
      but safe by constant observation and titration of naloxone. A patient who
      insists on leaving could be given naloxone IM, but will still be at risk of
      fatal respiratory depression. In opioid addicts, naloxone may precipitate
      a withdrawal syndrome with abdominal cramps, nausea and diarrhoea,
      but these usually settle within 2hr. Ventricular tachyarrhythmias occur
      occasionally.
                                               SALICYLATE POISONING            189

Salicylate poisoning
Standard aspirin tablets contain 300mg acetylsalicylic acid. Ingestion of
150mg/kg body weight usually produces mild toxicity; 500mg/kg will cause
severe and possibly fatal poisoning. Poisoning can result from absorption
of salicylate ointment through the skin.
Clinical features
Commonly vomiting, tinnitus, deafness, sweating, vasodilatation, hyperven-
tilation, and dehydration. Hypokalaemia may occur.
Severe poisoning may produce confusion, coma, and convulsions.
Children are prone to develop hyperpyrexia and hypoglycaemia.
Rare features include non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema, cerebral oedema,
and renal failure.
Metabolic and acid-base disturbances
These may be complex: adults usually have a mixed metabolic acidosis
and respiratory alkalosis, but the respiratory effects predominate. In small
children and a few adults, acidosis predominates, and is often associated
with confusion or coma.
Management
Consider gastric lavage if a patient has ingested >500mg/kg body weight
in the previous 1hr. After ingestion of >4.5g (or 2g in a child) give 50g
activated charcoal (25g in a child) to d absorption and i elimination of
salicylate. Measure plasma salicylate concentration (and repeat after
a few hours if further symptoms occur, since salicylate level may i due
to continuing absorption). Check U&E, glucose, and ABG if there are
CNS features or signs of severe poisoning. A second dose of charcoal
may be useful if the plasma salicylate increases, suggesting delayed gastric
emptying, or if enteric-coated tablets have been taken.
Mild poisoning Children with plasma salicylate <350mg/L (2.5mmol/L) and
adults with <450mg/L (3.3mmol/L) usually need only i oral ﬂuids.
Moderate poisoning Children with salicylate >350mg/L and adults with
>450mg/L need IV ﬂuids to correct dehydration and i elimination of
salicylate: sodium bicarbonate 1.26% (adults 500mL hourly for 3hr)
alkalinizes the urine (which is much more effective than a massive diuresis
in i salicylate excretion). Urine pH should be >7.5, ideally 8.0–8.5. Repeat
salicylate level, check U&E and add K+ as necessary.
Severe poisoning CNS features, acidosis or salicylate >700mg/L (5.1mmol/L)
are associated with signiﬁcant mortality. Get expert advice (b p.181)
and consider urgent referral for haemodialysis. Correct acidosis and give
repeated activated charcoal via a NG tube. In life-threatening poisoning
with coma and extreme hyperventilation, paralysis and IPPV may help,
while haemodialysis removes salicylate and corrects the electrolyte
disturbances. Give glucose IV, since brain glucose levels may be low
despite normal blood glucose concentrations. Do not use forced diuresis,
which is ineffective and may cause pulmonary oedema.
190    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Paracetamol poisoning
      Paracetamol (‘acetaminophen’ in USA) may cause severe liver damage if
      12g (24 tablets) or >150mg paracetamol/kg body weight are taken. Some
      patients have risk factors for enhanced toxicity (see below) and may be at
      risk if >75mg/kg has been taken.
      In obese patients (>110kg) calculate the toxic dose in mg/kg, and the dose
      of acetylcysteine, using a weight of 110kg, rather than the patient’s actual
      weight.
      A metabolite of paracetamol (N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine, NAPQI)
      binds glutathione in the liver and causes hepatic necrosis when stores
      of glutathione are exhausted. Renal failure from acute tubular necrosis
      occurs occasionally, but renal failure without liver failure is rare.
      Risk factors for paracetamol toxicity
      Alcoholics and patients on drugs that induce hepatic enzymes are at
      greater risk of toxicity, because of i production of the toxic metabolite
      of paracetamol. The relevant drugs are anticonvulsants, rifampicin, and
      St John’s wort.
      Patients with malnutrition, anorexia, cachexia, HIV infection or cystic
      ﬁbrosis may have d glutathione stores and be at i risk of liver damage.
      Clinical features
      Nausea, vomiting and abdominal discomfort are common within a few
      hours. In untreated patients developing liver damage, vomiting continues
      beyond 12hr and there is pain and tenderness over the liver (from 24hr),
      jaundice (at 2–4 days), and sometimes coma from hypoglycaemia (at
      1–3 days) and hepatic encephalopathy (onset at 3–5 days). Loin pain,
      haematuria and proteinuria suggest incipient renal failure. Hepatic failure
      causes bleeding from coagulation abnormalities and hyperventilation from
      metabolic acidosis. In fatal cases cerebral oedema, septicaemia and DIC
      are common. However, many patients survive severe liver damage and
      recover completely.
      LFTs are normal until >18hr after the overdose. The most sensitive
      lab evidence of liver damage is often a prolonged INR (from 24hr after
      overdose). Liver enzymes (ALT and AST) may reach >10,000units/L at
      3–4 days. Bilirubin rises more slowly (max at about 5 days).
      Paracetamol antidotes
      Acetylcysteine (Parvolex®; previously called N-acetylcysteine) is given by
      IV infusion in 5% glucose. Initial dose is 150mg/kg body weight in 200mL
      glucose over 15min, 50mg/kg in 500mL over 4hr, then 100mg/kg in 1L
      over 16hr. Acetylcysteine can cause side effects (which are more likely
      if the plasma paracetamol level is low)—erythema and urticaria around
      the infusion site or more generalized rashes, itching, nausea, angioedema,
      bronchospasm, and rarely hypotension or hypertension. Side effects are
      dose related and usually start in the ﬁrst hour of treatment. If they occur,
      stop the infusion and give an antihistamine (eg chlorphenamine 10mg IV
      over 1min). When symptoms have settled, acetylcysteine can usually be
      resumed at the lowest infusion rate (100mg/kg body weight over 16hr).
                                              PARACETAMOL POISONING                 191

Methionine is rarely needed but may be useful in patients who refuse IV
treatment or if acetylcsteine is not available. Methionine is given orally as
capsules or tablets, 2.5g every 4hr to a total of 10g. Methionine has no
signiﬁcant adverse effects. It is less effective than acetylcysteine in patients
who are vomiting or who present >8hr after ingestion. Methionine may
be ineffective in patients treated with activated charcoal.
Children
Serious paracetamol poisoning is rare in children. Young children rarely take
large amounts of paracetamol, and they metabolize it differently from adults
and may have less risk of hepatotoxicity. However, there is no data for assessing
the risk in children, so use the same treatment guidelines as for adults.
If it is certain that <150mg/kg has been taken (or <75mg/kg if there are
risk factors for toxicity: see b p.190, then no investigation or treatment is
needed and the child may be discharged.
Treatment with acetylcysteine is rarely needed in children. Doses are as
for adults (opposite), but with smaller volumes of ﬂuid for IV infusion.
Pregnancy
Assess the risk of toxicity and treat as for non-pregnant patients.
Acetylcysteine and methionine do not seem to carry any risk to the fetus,
and may protect the fetal liver from damage. Paracetamol overdose does
not appear to cause teratogenic effects.
Staggered overdoses
If the patient took two or more paracetamol overdoses in a day assess
the risk by plotting on the treatment graph the time interval since the ﬁrst
dose. For overdoses taken over several days the graph cannot be used. If
the patient has symptoms of toxicity or the amount taken was >150mg/kg
(75mg/kg in high risk groups) take blood for INR, LFTs, U&E and paracetamol
(which may conﬁrm that some was taken, even if the treatment graph cannot
be used), and treat with acetylcysteine. If in doubt start treatment and get
expert advice.
Outcome of treatment
Treatment with acetylcysteine or methionine within 8hr of an overdose is
very effective in preventing liver and renal damage. Later treatment is less
effective, but still worthwhile.
Late presentation after paracetamol poisoning
Patients who present late are more likely to be severely poisoned than
those who present soon after ingestion. Late presenters often have con-
tinuing vomiting and abdominal pain, which are symptoms of liver damage.
The treatment graph (b p.193) may be unreliable at >15hr, because of
insufﬁcient data on untreated patients.
Liver transplantation
Liver transplantation is occasionally needed for hepatic failure due to para-
cetamol overdose in patients who presented or were treated late. Appropriate
patients must be identiﬁed and referred to a liver transplant unit as soon as
possible. Transplant criteria include arterial pH <7.30 (H+ >50nmol/L) after
resuscitation, or PT >100 seconds (INR >6.7) and creatinine >300micromol/L
in patients with grade 3 or 4 hepatic encephalopathy.
192    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Management of paracetamol poisoning
      The time since ingestion is crucial in interpreting paracetamol concentra-
      tions and assessing the need for speciﬁc treatment. Record the time of
      ingestion as accurately as possible. When taking blood for paracetamol
      levels record the precise time in the notes and on blood bottles and
      forms. Start treatment immediately if the time of ingestion is unknown.
      Management within 4 hours of ingestion
      Consider activated charcoal (b p.185) if >12g or 150mg/kg paracetamol
      has been taken in the previous 1hr. Take blood at 4 hr from ingestion
      and use graph (Fig. 4.1) to assess risk of liver damage: use line A for most
      patients; line B for high risk patients. If the result is above the relevant line,
      give IV acetylcysteine or oral methionine (see b p.190).
      Management at 4–8 hours from ingestion
      Measure paracetamol and use the graph to assess risk of liver damage:
      for most patients use line A, for high risk patients use line B. If above the
      relevant line, or only just below it, give IV acetylcysteine or oral methio-
      nine (for doses see b p.190). Treatment is most effective if started before
      8 hours: start it at once if paracetamol level is not available by this time
      and >150mg/kg has been taken. Patients treated with acetylcysteine or
      methionine within 8 hours of an overdose should be medically ﬁt for dis-
      charge at the end of the treatment course.
      Management at 8–15 hours from ingestion
      Urgent action is needed: start treatment with IV acetylcysteine immedi-
      ately if >150mg/kg or 12g paracetamol have been taken. Measure plasma
      paracetamol and use the graph to assess the risk of liver damage: for most
      patients use line A; for high risk patients use line B. If the paracetamol level
      is well below the line and patient is asymptomatic, stop acetylcysteine treat-
      ment. Continue acetylcysteine if level is above the relevant line, if there is
      doubt about the time of ingestion or if the patient has nausea or vomiting. At
      the end of acetylcysteine treatment check INR and plasma creatinine: if these
      are normal and the patient asymptomatic he/she is medically ﬁt for discharge.
      Management at 15–24 hours from ingestion
      Urgent action is needed: give IV acetylcysteine immediately if >150mg/kg
      or >12g paracetamol have been taken. Measure plasma paracetamol, cre-
      atinine and INR. If at 24hr after ingestion a patient is asymptomatic, with
      normal INR, normal creatinine, and plasma paracetamol <10mg/L he/she
      may be discharged. Other patients need continuing monitoring and possibly
      further treatment with acetylcysteine.
      Management at >24 hours from ingestion
      Measure paracetamol, LFTs, U&E, creatinine, INR, and ABG. Start treat-
      ment with IV acetylcysteine if >150mg/kg or 12g paracetamol have been
      taken, investigations are abnormal or patient is symptomatic. Seek expert
      advice from Poisons Information Service (b p.181) or liver unit.
                                              PARACETAMOL POISONING                193

    Plasma                                                        Plasma
 paracetamol                                                   paracetamol
     (mg/L)                                                      (mmol/L)
 200
                                                                             1.3
 190
 180                                                                         1.2

 170
                                                                             1.1
 160
 150                                                                         1.0
                                           A
 140                             Normal treatment line                       0.9
 130
 120                                                                         0.8

 110
                                                                             0.7
 100
  90                                                                         0.6
  80
                                                                             0.5
  70
  60                                                                         0.4
  50
                                                                             0.3
  40
  30                                                                         0.2
  20                   B
          High risk treatment line                                           0.1
  10
   0                                                                         0
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 14 16                 18    20   22    24
                       Hours after ingestion
Fig. 4.1 Paracetamol treatment graph.
Normal treatment line A for most patients.
High risk treatment line B for patients with chronic alcoholism, malnutrition,
anorexia, cachexia, HIV infection, or cystic ﬁbrosis, or taking anticonvulsants,
rifampicin or St John’s wort.
Note Check whether the laboratory reports paracetamol in mg/L or mmol/L.
Start treatment at once if in doubt about the time of the overdose, or if the
plasma paracetamol is only just below the relevant treatment line.
194    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Tricyclic antidepressant poisoning
      Anticholinergic poisoning is usually caused by an overdose of tricyclic anti-
      depressants, but may result from other drugs, eg procyclidine or atropine
      (present in Atropa belladonna, ‘deadly nightshade’).
      Clinical features
      Common features are tachycardia, dry skin, dry mouth, dilated pupils,
      urinary retention, ataxia, jerky limb movements, and drowsiness leading to
      coma. Unconscious patients often have a divergent squint, i muscle tone
      and reﬂexes, myoclonus and extensor plantar responses. The pupils may
      be dilated and unreactive. In deep coma there may be muscle ﬂaccidity
      with no detectable reﬂexes and respiratory depression requiring IPPV.
      Convulsions occur in 810% of unconscious patients and may precipitate
      cardiac arrest. Patients recovering from coma often suffer delirium and
      hallucinations and have jerky limb movements and severe dysarthria.
      ECG changes
      Sinus tachycardia is usual, but as poisoning worsens PR interval and QRS
      duration i. These changes help to conﬁrm a clinical diagnosis of tricyclic
      poisoning in an unconscious patient. The P wave may be superimposed on
      the preceding T wave, so the rhythm can look like VT when it is actually
      sinus tachycardia with prolonged conduction. In very severe poisoning,
      ventricular arrhythmias and bradycardia may occur, especially in hypoxic
      patients. Death may follow cardio-respiratory depression and acidosis.
      Management
      • Clear airway, intubate and ventilate if necessary, and give nursing care.
      • Observe continuously, in view of the potential for rapid deterioration.
      • Monitor ECG and check ABG in unconscious or post-ictal patients.
      • Give activated charcoal by mouth or gastric tube if more than 4mg/kg
        has been taken within 1hr and the airway is safe or can be protected.
      • Do not give anticonvulsants for single brief ﬁts, but give lorazepam or
        diazepam IV if ﬁts are frequent or prolonged.
      • Most arrhythmias occur in unconscious patients within a few hours of
        overdose. Treat arrhythmias by correcting hypoxia and acidosis. Sodium
        bicarbonate (8.4%, adult: 50–100mL IV; child: 1mL/kg) may dramatically
        improve cardiac rhythm and output (by altering protein binding and
        d active free tricyclic drug). Consider further bicarbonate, depending
        on the clinical response, ECG and arterial pH. Aim for pH 7.5–7.55,
        avoiding excessive alkalosis (pH > 7.65), which may be fatal.
      • Avoid anti-arrhythmic drugs. If arrhythmias do not respond to bicarbo-
        nate, discuss with a poisons specialist (b p.181).
      • Correct hypotension by elevating the foot of the trolley and giving IV
        ﬂuids. Glucagon may help in severe hypotension (b p.198). Dopamine
        (2–10micrograms/kg/min) is occasionally indicated for unresponsive
        hypotension on specialist advice.
      • Consider Intralipid® (b p.187) for severe arrhythmias or cardiac arrest.
      • Do not use physostigmine or ﬂumazenil (risk of precipitating ﬁts).
      • Unconscious patients usually improve over about 12hr and regain con-
        sciousness within 36hr. Delirium and hallucinations may persist for 2–3
        days and require sedation with oral diazepam in large doses (sometimes
        20–30mg PO every 2hr initially).
                               TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANT POISONING                    195

ECG changes in tricyclic antidepressant poisoning

                 I                 aVR                  V1

                                                                              V4
               II                  aVL                  V2

                                                                              V5

               III                 aVF                  V3

                                                                              V6

Fig. 4.2 ECG in tricyclic antidepressant poisoning, showing sinus tachycardia with
prolonged conduction, which may be mistaken for VT.

          1 am                           4 am                     9.30 am

         1 second
Fig. 4.3 Serial ECG rhythm strips in amitriptyline poisoning, showing spontaneous
recovery with supportive care.

                                           1 second
Fig. 4.4 ECG trace in very severe tricyclic antidepressant poisoning. The patient
was unconscious, GCS 3, and was intubated and ventilated, with BP 70/50.
196    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Benzodiazepine poisoning
      Benzodiazepine drugs (eg diazepam, nitrazepam, and temazepam) rarely
      cause serious poisoning when taken alone in overdose. However, they
      potentiate the effects of other CNS depressants, such as alcohol, tricyclic
      antidepressants and barbiturates.
      Clinical features
      Drowsiness, dizziness, ataxia, dysarthria. Rarely, coma, respiratory depres-
      sion, mild hypotension. Fatal poisoning is unusual, but may occur from
      respiratory depression in elderly patients and those with chronic COPD.
      Management
      Clear the airway and maintain ventilation if necessary. Provide supportive
      care. Gastric lavage and activated charcoal are not indicated if only a
      benzodiazepine has been taken.
      Many benzodiazepines have long-acting metabolites, which may affect
      driving and other motor skills for several days or even weeks after an
      overdose. Give appropriate warnings about this.
      Flumazenil is a speciﬁc benzodiazepine antagonist, but is not licensed in
      the UK for treating overdosage. It reverses the effects of benzodiazepines
      within 1min, but has a short duration of action (<1hr)—as a result,
      toxic effects often recur. Flumazenil can cause convulsions and cardiac
      arrhythmias and may precipitate a withdrawal syndrome in patients who
      are dependent on benzodiazepines. It is particularly dangerous in patients
      with combined benzodiazepine and tricyclic antidepressant poisoning,
      in whom it may cause convulsions and cardiac arrest. Flumazenil may
      occasionally be used by experts managing very severe benzodiazepine
      poisoning, but there is no place for its use by the non-specialist.

      Clomethiazole poisoning
      Clomethiazole overdosage may cause coma, respiratory depression, d
      muscle tone, hypotension and hypothermia. Excessive salivation and a
      characteristic smell of clomethiazole on the breath are often noticeable.
      Treat supportively. IPPV may be necessary.

      Phenothiazine poisoning
      The phenothiazines (eg chlorpromazine), butyrophenones (eg haloperidol),
      and related drugs are used as antipsychotics and anti-emetics. In over-
      dosage they may cause drowsiness, coma, hypotension, and hypothermia.
      Deep coma and respiratory depression are uncommon. Some conscious
      patients suffer dystonic reactions with oculogyric crises and muscle spasms
      causing torticollis or opisthotonus. Convulsions may occur. ECG changes
      of prolonged PR, QRS, and ST intervals, and arrhythmias are seen particularly
      with thioridazine poisoning.
      Treat supportively. Activated charcoal may help. If cardiac arrhythmias
      occur, correct hypoxia, acidosis and electrolyte abnormalities before
      giving any anti-arrhythmic drug. Treat dystonic reactions with procyclidine
      (5mg IV or 5–10mg IM), repeated if symptoms recur.
                                         SULPHONYLUREA POISONING               197

Barbiturate poisoning
Now uncommon, except in drug addicts. Overdosage with phenobarbitone
is seen occasionally. Barbiturate poisoning may cause coma, respiratory
depression, hypotension and hypothermia. There are no speciﬁc neuro-
logical signs. Skin blisters and rhabdomyolysis may result from prolonged
immobility. Treat supportively, with IPPV if necessary. Repeated doses of
activated charcoal may help to remove barbiturates. Very rarely, charcoal
haemoperfusion is indicated in some patients with deep and prolonged
coma and respiratory complications.

Lithium poisoning
Clinical features Often due to therapeutic overdosage or drug interac-
tions (eg with diuretics or NSAIDs), rather than deliberate self-harm.
Symptoms may start up to 24hr after an overdose, especially with slow-
release tablets. Nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea are followed by tremor,
ataxia, confusion, increased muscle tone and clonus. In severe cases there
may be convulsions, coma and renal failure. Lithium-induced nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus may complicate treatment.
Investigations Measure U&E and lithium (plain tube, not lithium heparin).
Therapeutic lithium levels are <1.2mmol/L. Toxic effects are often seen
at >1.5mmol/L. Soon after a large overdose, higher levels may occur with
little clinical effects, before lithium is distributed to tissues.
Management Activated charcoal does not absorb lithium. Gastric lavage
is indicated within 1hr of a single large overdose, except for slow-
release tablets, which are too large to pass up a gastric tube. Whole-
bowel irrigation (b p.185) may be considered for slow-release tablets:
discuss this with a poisons specialist (b p.181). Use standard supportive
measures and control convulsions with diazepam. Observe all patients
for >24 hours. Give oral ﬂuids in conscious patients. Forced diuresis is
contraindicated. Haemodialysis is the best treatment in severe poisoning,
but often has to be repeated because of rebound release of lithium from
tissue stores.

Sulphonylurea poisoning
Sulphonylurea drugs are used to treat non-insulin-dependent diabetes.
Accidental or deliberate overdosage causes hypoglycaemia, which may
recur over several days after long-acting drugs, such as chlorpropamide or
glibenclamide. In the Far East, sulphonylurea contamination of illicit drugs
used for erectile dysfunction has caused several cases of hypoglycaemia.
Check blood glucose and U&E. Correct hypoglycaemia with oral or IV
glucose (b p.150). Observe for at least 24hr (72hr for long-acting drugs)
and check BMG hourly. To prevent recurrent hypoglycaemia give 10%
glucose IV infusion; in severe cases 20% glucose may be needed, via
central line because of venous irritation. Hypokalaemia may occur. Check
U&E and add potassium as needed. In severe poisoning, get expert
advice (b p.181) and consider octreotide (unlicensed indication) which
blocks pancreatic insulin release: initial dose for adults 50micrograms
subcutaneous (SC) or IV.
198    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Beta-blocker poisoning
      Clinical features
      Overdosage with B-blockers (propranolol, oxprenolol, atenolol, labetolol,
      sotalol) may cause rapid and severe toxicity with hypotension and cardio-
      genic shock. There is usually a sinus bradycardia, but sometimes the heart
      rate remains normal. Coma, convulsions, and cardiac arrest may occur. ECG
      changes include marked QRS prolongation, and ST and T wave abnormalities.
      Propranolol may cause bronchospasm in asthmatics and hypoglycaemia in
      children. Sotalol can cause prolonged QTc and VT, with torsades de pointes.
      Management
      Monitor ECG, heart rate, and BP. Obtain reliable venous access. Check
      U&E and blood glucose. Consider activated charcoal (b p.185).
      Bradycardia and hypotension may respond to atropine (1–2mg for adult;
      0.02mg/kg for child), but this is often ineffective.
      Glucagon is the best treatment for severe cardiotoxicity and seems
      to work by activating myocardial adenylcyclase in a way not blocked by
      B-blockade. Glucagon 5–10mg IV (50–150micrograms/kg for a child) usually
      produces a dramatic improvement in pulse and BP, with return of cardiac
      output and consciousness. Glucagon often causes sudden vomiting—
      anticipate this and position the patient appropriately. In severe poisoning
      glucagon has a transient effect on cardiac output and further doses or an
      infusion are needed (4mg/hr, sometimes up to 15mg/hr, reducing gradually).
      Some patients need a total of 50–75mg of glucagon, which is reconstituted
      from 1mg vials of dry powder. If glucagon is unavailable or ineffective, give
      adrenaline (5–10micrograms/min) or dobutamine (2.5–10micrograms/kg/min),
      increasing the dose if necessary. Get expert advice (b p.181) in severe
      poisoning.
      Cardiac pacing may be tried for bradycardia, but is often ineffective.
      Occasionally, circulatory support has to be provided by prolonged chest
      compressions or extracorporeal cardiac bypass while more glucagon is
      obtained or the B-blocker is metabolized. Consider insulin therapy (b
      p.187) for severe hypotension, and Intralipid® (b p.187) in cardiac arrest.

      Calcium antagonist poisoning
      Poisoning with verapamil, nifedipine, diltiazem or other calcium-channel
      blockers is rare, but may be fatal. Nausea, vomiting, dizziness and confusion
      may occur. Bradycardia and AV block may lead to AV dissociation, with
      hypotension and cardiac arrest (especially in patients taking B-adrenergic
      blockers). Metabolic acidosis, hyperkalaemia and hyperglycaemia may occur.
      Provide supportive treatment. Monitor ECG and BP. Obtain venous access.
      Consider activated charcoal. Check U&E, glucose, calcium. Give atropine
      (1–2mg, child 0.02mg/kg) for symptomatic bradycardia. Get expert help.
      Pacing may be needed. Calcium gluconate (10–20mL of 10% slowly IV,
      observing ECG) may d prolonged intra-cardiac conduction. Glucagon
      may help, as in B-blocker poisoning (see above). Inotropic support with
      dobutamine, adrenaline or high dose insulin therapy (b p.187) may be
      needed to maintain cardiac output. In severe poisoning or cardiac arrest
      consider Intralipid (b p.187).
                                            ACE INHIBITOR POISONING             199

Digoxin poisoning
Toxicity from the therapeutic use of digoxin is relatively common. Acute
poisoning is rare, but may be fatal. Similar effects occur with digitoxin and
very rarely with plants containing cardiac glycosides (foxglove, oleander
and yew).
Clinical features
Nausea, vomiting, malaise, delirium, xanthopsia (yellow ﬂashes or
discolouration of vision). Acute poisoning usually causes bradycardia
with PR and QRS prolongation. There may be AV block, AV disso-
ciation and escape rhythms, sometimes with ventricular ectopics or VT.
Hyperkalaemia occurs, and in severe cases metabolic acidosis due to
hypotension and d tissue perfusion.
Management
Provide supportive treatment. Monitor ECG and BP. Obtain venous
access. Give activated charcoal to d absorption and prevent entero-hepatic
recycling of digoxin (b p.185). Measure U&E, plasma digoxin, and ABG in
severe poisoning. Get expert help for patients who are severely poisoned.
Correct severe metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate. Treat hyper-
kalaemia >6mmol/L (b p.162). Bradycardia and AV block often respond
to atropine IV total 1–2mg (child 0.02mg/kg). Cardiac pacing is not always
effective and a high voltage is often needed for capture. VT may respond
to lidocaine or a B-blocker. Treat severe poisoning with digoxin anti-
bodies (Digibind®), which rapidly correct arrhythmias and hyperkalaemia.
Digibind® is expensive and rarely needed, so is not stocked in many hospi-
tals: Poisons Information Services (b p.181) can advise about emergency
supplies and the dose required for the patient’s body weight and plasma
digoxin concentration or the quantity taken.

ACE inhibitor poisoning
Overdosage with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
(eg captopril, enalapril, lisinopril) may cause drowsiness, hypotension,
hyperkalaemia and rarely, renal failure. Monitor BP and ECG. Give IV 0.9%
saline if BP is low. Check U&E. Consider activated charcoal (b p.185).
200    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Theophylline poisoning
      Theophylline and aminophylline can cause fatal poisoning. Many
      preparations are slow-release and may not produce serious toxicity until
      12–24 hours after ingestion, so careful observation is essential.
      Features
      Nausea, vomiting (often severe and not helped by anti-emetics), abdominal
      pain, haematemesis, restlessness, i muscle tone, i reﬂexes, headache,
      convulsions. Coma, hyperventilation, hyperpyrexia and rhabdomyolysis
      may occur. Sinus tachycardia may be followed by supraventricular and
      ventricular arrhythmias and VF. BP may initially i, but later d in severe
      poisoning. Complex metabolic disturbances include a respiratory alkalosis
      followed by metabolic acidosis, hyperglycaemia, and severe hypokalaemia.
      Management
      • Treat supportively.
      • Monitor ECG, heart rate and BP.
      • Obtain venous access and measure U&E, glucose, ABG, plasma theo-
        phylline (repeated after a few hours). Repeat K+ hourly if patient is
        symptomatic, since early correction of hypokalaemia may prevent dan-
        gerous arrhythmias. Correct hypokalaemia with K+ (large amounts may
        be needed, but no faster than 20mmol/hr).
      • Perform gastric lavage if <1hr since ingestion. Give repeated activated
        charcoal (b p.185), by NG tube if necessary.
      • Intractable vomiting may respond to ondansetron (8mg slowly IV in adult).
      • GI bleeding may require transfusion and ranitidine (but not cimetidine,
        which slows metabolism of theophylline).
      • Tachycardia with an adequate cardiac output should be observed, but
        not treated. Non-selective B-blockers (eg propranolol) may help severe
        tachyarrhythmias and hypokalaemia, but cause bronchospasm in asth-
        matics. Lidocaine and mexiletine may precipitate ﬁts, so disopyramide is
        preferable for ventricular arrhythmias.
      • Control convulsions with diazepam or lorazepam. Paralyse, intubate,
        and provide IPPV if the airway is at risk from coma, ﬁts and vomiting.
      • Charcoal haemoperfusion may be needed in severe poisoning, especially
        if oral or NG activated charcoal is impracticable because of vomiting.
        Serious hyperkalaemia may occur during recovery from theophylline
        poisoning if large amounts of K+ were given earlier.

      Salbutamol poisoning
      Poisoning with B2-agonists (eg salbutamol, terbutaline) may cause
      vomiting, agitation, tremor, tachycardia, palpitations, hypokalaemia
      and hypertension. Rarely, there may be hallucinations, hyperglycaemia,
      ventricular tachyarrhythmias, myocardial ischaemia, and convulsions.
      Treat supportively:
      • Correct hypokalaemia by infusion of K+ (max 20 mmol/hour).
      • Monitor ECG and BP.
      • Activated charcoal may d drug absorption.
      • Do not treat tachycardia if there is an adequate cardiac output.
        Propranolol may help severe tachyarrhythmias and hypokalaemia, but
        can precipitate bronchospasm in asthmatics.
                                                      IRON POISONING          201

Iron poisoning
Small children often eat iron tablets, many of which resemble sweets.
Serious poisoning is uncommon, but fatalities can occur. Note that iron is
present in some weed/seed preparations.
Different preparations contain the equivalent of 35–110mg of elemental
iron per tablet, sometimes in slow-release form.
Serious toxicity is unlikely unless >60mg elemental iron/kg body weight
has been taken. The estimated lethal dose is about 150–300mg/kg.
Features
In the ﬁrst few hours after ingestion nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and
abdominal pain are common. Vomit and stools are often grey or black and
may contain blood. Hyperglycaemia and i WCC may occur. Most patients
do not develop further features.
In severe poisoning, early effects include haematemesis, drowsiness,
convulsions, coma, metabolic acidosis and shock.
Early symptoms settle after 6–12hr, but a few patients then deteriorate
24–48hr after ingestion, with shock, hypoglycaemia, jaundice, metabolic
acidosis, hepatic encephalopathy, renal failure, and occasionally bowel
infarction. Survivors may develop gastric strictures or pyloric obstruction
2–5 weeks after the overdose.
Management
• Check serum iron, FBC, glucose, and also ABG in severe poisoning.
• Perform gastric lavage if >20mg elemental iron/kg body weight has
  been taken in the previous 1hr. Do not give charcoal, which does not
  absorb iron. Iron tablets are radio-opaque and can be counted on a
  plain abdominal X-ray ﬁlm. Whole-bowel irrigation (b p.185) may be
  useful if many tablets remain in the gut, especially with slow-release
  formulations.
• Use supportive measures if required.
• Obtain expert advice in serious poisoning. Coma and shock indicate
  severe poisoning needing immediate treatment with desferrioxamine
  by IV infusion (15mg/kg/hr, max 80mg/kg in 24hr). Desferrioxamine
  should also be given if the serum iron exceeds the expected total
  iron binding capacity (about 54–75mmol/L): measurement of total
  iron binding capacity may give misleading results after iron poisoning.
  Desferrioxamine causes hypotension if infused too rapidly and can
  produce rashes and rarely, anaphylaxis, pulmonary oedema or ARDS.
  The iron-desferrioxamine complex makes the urine orange or red,
  which conﬁrms that free iron has been bound and that desferrioxamine
  was required. Reduce desferrioxamine dosage when there is clinical
  improvement and serum iron is less than the expected total iron binding
  capacity.
• Patients who still have no symptoms 6 hours after an iron overdose
  have probably not ingested toxic amounts and may be discharged, with
  advice to return if symptoms develop.
• Pregnancy does not alter the treatment needed for iron poisoning;
  use desferrioxamine if indicated.
202    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Ethanol poisoning
      Features
      Overdosage of ethanol (ethyl alcohol or ‘alcohol’) is very common.
      Alcohol potentiates the CNS depressant effects of many drugs. It initially
      causes disinhibition and later ataxia, dizziness, dysarthria and drowsiness.
      In severe poisoning there may be coma with respiratory depression,
      hypotension, hypothermia and a metabolic acidosis. Hypoglycaemia is a
      particular problem in children and may occur after some hours. Death
      may result from respiratory failure or aspiration of vomit.
      For an adult, the fatal dose of ethanol alone is 8300–500mL of absolute
      alcohol: whisky and gin usually contain 40–50% ethanol. Do not assume
      that d GCS is due to alcohol until other causes have been excluded.
      Rarely, alcohol causes lactic acidosis (especially in patients with liver disease
      or taking biguanide hypoglycaemic drugs) or ketoacidosis (due to dehydration
      and hypoglycaemia in alcoholics)—see b p.622.
      Treatment
      • Maintain a clear airway and adequate ventilation.
      • Check blood glucose every 1–2 hours in severe poisoning.
      • Correct hypoglycaemia with glucose, not with glucagon.
      • Look for signs of injury, especially head injury.
      • Emergency measurement of blood ethanol rarely alters management.
      • Gastric lavage and activated charcoal are ineffective in ethanol intoxication.

      Methanol poisoning
      Methanol is used as a solvent and in antifreeze. Ingestion of 10mL of pure
      methanol may cause blindness and 30mL can be fatal, the toxic effects
      being due to the metabolites formaldehyde and formic acid.
      Methylated spirits is a mixture of ethanol and water with about 5%
      methanol: toxicity is almost entirely due to ethanol.
      Clinical features
      Methanol initially causes only mild transient drowsiness. Serious toxicity
      develops after a latent period of 12–24 hours with vomiting, abdominal pain,
      headache, dizziness, blurring of vision, and drowsiness leading to coma. There
      is a severe metabolic acidosis, hyperglycaemia and i serum amylase. Survivors
      may be blind from optic nerve damage and develop Parkinsonian problems.
      Management
      • Consider gastric lavage if <1hr since ingestion. Do not give charcoal.
      • Measure ABG, U&E, Cl–, HCO3–, glucose, FBC, LFTs and osmolality,
        and plasma methanol if possible. Calculate osmolal gap and anion gap.
      • Read Toxbase advice (b p.181). Discuss with Poisons Information Service.
      • Observe for at least 6hr after ingestion, even if asymptomatic.
      • Early use of fomepizole or ethanol (as for ethylene glycol, b p.203)
        minimizes methanol toxicity and should be started if poisoning is likely,
        especially if there is a high anion gap metabolic acidosis.
      • Use sodium bicarbonate to correct metabolic acidosis (aim for pH 7.5).
        Large amounts may be needed and hypernatraemia may occur.
      • Give folinic acid (1mg/kg, max 50mg, IV every 6hr for 48hr).
      • In severe poisoning, refer to ICU for haemodialysis and possibly IPPV.
                                        ETHYLENE GLYCOL POISONING                203

Ethylene glycol poisoning
Ethylene glycol is used mainly as antifreeze. Fatal dose for an adult is about
100g (90mL of pure ethylene glycol). Toxic effects are due to metabolites
glycolaldehyde, glycolic acid and oxalic acid. Fomepizole or ethanol block
ethylene glycol metabolism, preventing toxicity.
Clinical features
In the ﬁrst 12hr after ingestion the patient looks drunk, but does not smell
of alcohol. Ataxia, dysarthria, nausea, vomiting, and sometimes haematem-
esis occur, followed by convulsions, coma and severe metabolic acidosis.
From 12–24hr after ingestion hyperventilation, pulmonary oedema,
tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias and cardiac failure may develop.
Hypocalcaemia may be severe. Acute tubular necrosis and renal failure
occur at 24–72hr. Cranial nerve palsies may develop.
Urine microscopy shows calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals which are
diagnostic of ethylene glycol poisoning. Some makes of antifreeze contain
ﬂuorescein, which makes urine ﬂuoresce in ultraviolet light (eg a Wood’s
lamp from a dermatology department). This helps to conﬁrm ethylene glycol
poisoning, but the absence of ﬂuorescence does not exclude poisoning.
Management
• Consider gastric lavage if <1hr since ingestion. Do not give charcoal.
• Measure ABG, U&E, Cl–, HCO3–, glucose, FBC, LFTs, osmolality, and
  plasma ethylene glycol if possible. Calculate osmolal gap and anion gap.
• Read Toxbase advice (b p.181). Discuss with Poisons Information
  Service.
• Observe for at least 6hr after ingestion, even if asymptomatic.
• Monitor ECG, pulse, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and urine output.
• Early use of fomepizole or ethanol minimizes toxicity and should be
  started if poisoning is likely.
• High anion gap metabolic acidosis (b p.99) occurs in ethylene glycol
  poisoning (and also methanol poisoning, diabetic ketoacidosis, alcoholic
  ketoacidosis, and renal failure), but acidosis only develops after some
  ethylene glycol has been metabolized.
• Consider fomepizole: discuss with Poisons Information Service
  (b p.181) about indications, dosage, and where to obtain it.
• If fomepizole is not available give ethanol orally as whisky, gin or vodka
  (adult 125–150mL, child 2mL/kg) followed by IVI of ethanol, preferably
  as 5% solution in glucose. Initial IV adult dose is 12g ethanol/hr, i for
  alcoholics and during haemodialysis and adjusted to maintain blood
  ethanol at 81g/L (discuss dose with Poisons Information Service).
• Use sodium bicarbonate to correct metabolic acidosis (aim for pH 7.5).
  Large amounts may be needed and hypernatraemia may occur.
• Correct severe hypocalcaemia with calcium gluconate (10mL of 10%
  slowly IV).
• Haemodialysis may be required in severe poisoning, with frequent
  measurements of blood ethylene glycol concentrations (and ethanol
  if this is used). Intensive care and ventilation may be needed.
204    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Paraquat poisoning
      Paraquat is an effective weedkiller which is very toxic if ingested: death is
      likely after 10mL of liquid paraquat (100 or 200g/L). Paraquat poisoning
      is now rare in the UK, where paraquat is no longer approved for sale or
      use, but accidental or deliberate poisoning still occurs in many developing
      countries.
      Inhalation of dilute paraquat spray may cause sore throat and epistaxis,
      but not systemic poisoning. No speciﬁc treatment is needed and
      symptoms resolve in a few days. Prolonged contact of paraquat with the
      skin causes erythema and sometimes ulceration, but absorption is rarely
      sufﬁcient to cause systemic toxicity. Remove soiled clothing and wash the
      skin thoroughly with water.
      Splashes in the eyes cause pain and corneal ulceration. Immediately
      irrigate with water and refer for ophthalmological review.
      Clinical features of paraquat ingestion
      Paraquat is corrosive and causes immediate burning pain in the mouth and
      throat, nausea and vomiting, followed by abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
      Large amounts (>6g) of paraquat result in rapid deterioration with shock,
      pulmonary oedema, metabolic acidosis, coma, convulsions, and death
      within 24hr.
      Smaller quantities (3–6g) do not produce shock. After 24hr, chemical
      burns of the mouth and throat cause pain and difﬁculty in swallowing
      and speaking. The burns look white until the surface sloughs after about
      3 days, leaving painful raw areas.
      Renal failure occurs at 1–2 days and there is mild jaundice.
      Paraquat lung usually develops by 5–7 days, with pulmonary oedema and
      ﬁbrosis causing breathlessness and cyanosis. Lung shadowing is seen on
      CXR. Death from hypoxia occurs 7–14 days after poisoning. 1.5–2g of
      paraquat may produce slower respiratory failure, with gradual deteriora-
      tion until death up to 6 weeks after ingestion. Survival with lung damage
      is uncommon.
      Management
      • Do not give O2, which increases pulmonary toxicity of paraquat.
      • Consider gastric lavage if <1hr since ingestion.
      • Give oral activated charcoal immediately, with IV analgesia and anti-emetics.
      • Send urine (and gastric ﬂuid if available) for the laboratory to test
        for paraquat, which can be done very quickly using sodium dithionite.
        A negative test within 4 hours of suspected ingestion excludes signiﬁ-
        cant poisoning. If paraquat is present, measure the plasma concentra-
        tion if possible, since it helps assessment of the prognosis: the Poisons
        Information Services (b p.181) can advise about paraquat measurement
        and the interpretation of results.
      • Unfortunately, no treatment improves the outcome of paraquat
        poisoning.
      • Keep patients who are likely to die as comfortable as possible.
                                  PETROL AND PARAFFIN POISONING               205

Petrol and parafﬁn poisoning
Petrol, parafﬁn (kerosene), and other petroleum distillates are used as
fuels and solvents. They contain mixtures of hydrocarbons, often with
small quantities of other chemicals. Unintentional poisoning occurs after
liquids have been stored in inappropriate and unlabelled containers. The
major problem is pneumonitis caused by aspiration of hydrocarbons into
the lungs.
Clinical features
In many cases no symptoms occur. There may be nausea, vomiting, and
occasionally diarrhoea. Aspiration into the lungs causes choking, coughing,
wheeze, breathlessness, cyanosis and fever. X-ray changes of pneumonitis
(shadowing in the mid or lower zones) may occur without respiratory
symptoms or signs. Occasionally, pleural effusions or pneumatoceles
develop. In severe cases, there may be pulmonary oedema, drowsiness,
convulsions or coma. Rare problems include renal failure and intravascular
haemolysis.
Management
Many patients remain well and need no treatment.
Avoid gastric lavage unless very large quantities have been taken or there
is serious concern about another poison: in these rare cases lavage may
be done on specialist advice if the patient has a good cough reﬂex or the
airway is protected by a cuffed ET tube. Obtain a CXR and observe for
respiratory problems. Patients with a normal initial CXR who have no
symptoms or signs 6 hours after ingestion may be discharged with advice
to return if symptoms develop.
If symptoms occur, treat supportively with O2 and bronchodilators as
necessary. Steroids and prophylactic antibiotics are unhelpful. IPPV is
occasionally needed because of severe pulmonary oedema.
206    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Organophosphate poisoning
      Organophosphates are widely used as insecticides. Poisoning with these
      chemicals is rare in the UK, but common in many developing countries.
      Organophosphates are absorbed through the skin, bronchial mucosa and
      gut, and inhibit cholinesterases, causing accumulation of acetylcholine at
      nerve endings and neuromuscular junctions. The speed of onset, severity
      and duration of toxicity vary between different compounds. Irreversible
      binding of cholinesterase (‘ageing’) develops after some minutes or hours.
      Pralidoxime reactivates cholinesterase if given promptly, before ageing
      occurs.
      Organophosphate nerve gas agents such as sarin may be released
      deliberately by terrorists. Information is available from Toxbase (b p.181).
      Carbamate insecticides act similarly to organophosphates, but poisoning
      with carbamates is generally less severe and pralidoxime is not needed.
      Clinical features
      Minor exposure to organophosphates may cause subclinical poisoning
      with d cholinesterase levels, but no symptoms or signs. Symptoms may be
      delayed by 12–24hr after skin exposure.
      Early features of toxicity include anxiety, restlessness, insomnia, tiredness,
      headache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal colic, diarrhoea, sweating, hyper-
      salivation, and miosis. Muscle weakness and fasciculation may develop.
      In severe poisoning there is widespread paralysis with respiratory
      failure, pulmonary oedema, profuse bronchial secretions, bronchospasm,
      convulsions and coma. Hyperglycaemia and cardiac arrhythmias may occur.
      Occasionally, delayed effects of poisoning develop 1–4 days after acute
      poisoning, with cranial nerve palsies, muscle weakness and respiratory
      failure which resolve after 2–3 weeks. A peripheral neuropathy may
      develop after 2 weeks, usually involving the legs.
      Management1
      • Wear protective clothing and avoid getting contaminated yourself.
      • Give supportive treatment as needed.
      • Clear the airway and remove secretions. Give O2 and IPPV if needed.
      • Insert two IV cannulae. Take blood for cholinesterase.
      • If there are profuse bronchial secretions or bronchospasm, give atro-
        pine IV (adult 2mg, child 0.02mg/kg), repeated every 5min with the dose
        doubled each time until the chest sounds clear, systolic BP >80mmHg
        and pulse >80. Some patients need >100mg of atropine.
      • Give diazepam to treat agitation and control convulsions.
      • In moderate or severe poisoning give pralidoxime mesylate (also called
        P2S). The dose of pralidoxime is 30mg/kg IV over 5–10min, repeated if
        necessary every 4hr. Improvement is usually apparent within 30min.
      • Poisons Information Services can advise on pralidoxime supply and use:
        in the UK the Blood Transfusion Service will supply pralidoxime if there
        are multiple casualties with organophosphate poisoning.
      1 Eddleston M et al. (2008) Management of acute organophosphorus pesticide poisoning. Lancet.
        371: 597–607.
                                                   CYANIDE POISONING            207

Cyanide poisoning
Cyanide compounds are widely used in industry and may be ingested
or inhaled inadvertently or deliberately. Cyanides produced by burning
polyurethane foam i mortality from smoke inhalation: if there is severe
acidosis consider cyanide toxicity. Cyanide poisoning may be caused by
the drug sodium nitroprusside or ingestion of amygdalin (laetrile) from
the kernels of apricots, cherries and other fruits. Solutions for removing
artiﬁcial ﬁngernails may contain acetonitrile (methyl cyanide).
Cyanides inhibit cytochrome oxidase, blocking the tricarboxylic acid cycle
and stopping cellular respiration. This process is reversible. Inhalation
of hydrogen cyanide often causes death within minutes. Ingestion of
cyanides can produce rapid poisoning, but food in the stomach may delay
absorption and the onset of symptoms. Delayed poisoning may follow
absorption of cyanides through the skin. Ingested cyanide compounds
react with gastric acid to form hydrogen cyanide, which could poison
ﬁrst-aiders giving mouth to mouth resuscitation.
Clinical features
Acute poisoning causes dizziness, anxiety, headache, palpitations, breath-
lessness, and drowsiness. In severe cases, there may be coma, convulsions,
paralysis, pulmonary oedema, cardiac arrhythmias and cardiorespiratory
failure, with metabolic acidosis. Most of the clinical features result from
severe hypoxia, but cyanosis is uncommon. Classically, there is a smell of
bitter almonds on the breath, but many people cannot detect this.
Management
• Avoid getting contaminated yourself.
• Provide supportive measures: give 100% O2 and monitor ECG.
• Remove contaminated clothing and wash exposed skin.
• Consider activated charcoal or gastric lavage within 1hr of ingestion.
• In mild poisoning, reassurance, O2 and observation may be all that is
  required. Exposure to cyanide causes great anxiety and it may be dif-
  ﬁcult to distinguish between fear of poisoning and early symptoms of
  toxicity.
• Speciﬁc antidotes should be available, but are not always needed.
Some speciﬁc antidotes to cyanide are dangerous in the absence of
cyanide—only give if poisoning is moderate or severe (eg coma). In severe
cyanide poisoning, give dicobalt edetate (Kelocyanor®) 300mg IV over 1min,
repeated if there is no improvement after 1min. In the absence of cyanide,
dicobalt edetate may cause cobalt poisoning with facial, laryngeal and
pulmonary oedema, vomiting, tachycardia and hypotension. Alternative
treatment is sodium thiosulphate (adult dose 25mL of 50% solution IV over
10min; child 400mg/kg) with sodium nitrite (adult dose 10mL of 3% solution IV
over 5–20min; child dose 0.13–0.33mL of 3% solution/kg, ie 4–10mg/kg).
Sodium thiosulphate often causes vomiting. Sodium nitrite may cause
hypotension. High doses of hydroxocobalamin (5–10g, Cyanokit®) are
useful and relatively safe in cyanide poisoning, especially in victims of
smoke inhalation.
208    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Carbon monoxide poisoning
      Carbon monoxide (CO) is a tasteless and odourless gas produced by
      incomplete combustion. Poisoning may occur from car exhausts, ﬁres
      and faulty gas heaters. CO is also produced by metabolism of methylene
      chloride (used in paint strippers and as an industrial solvent). CO d the
      O2-carrying capacity of the blood by binding haemoglobin (Hb) to form
      carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb). This impairs O2 delivery from blood to
      the tissues and also inhibits cytochrome oxidase, blocking O2 utilization.
      These effects combine to cause severe tissue hypoxia.
      The elimination half-life of CO is about 4hr on breathing air, 1hr on 100%
      O2, and 23min on O2 at 3 atmospheres pressure.
      Clinical features
      Early features are headache, malaise, nausea and vomiting (sometimes
      misdiagnosed as a viral illness or gastroenteritis, especially if several
      members of a family are affected).
      In severe poisoning, there is coma with hyperventilation, hypotension,
      i muscle tone, i reﬂexes, extensor plantars and convulsions. Cherry-red
      colouring of the skin may be seen in fatal CO poisoning, but is rare in
      live patients. Skin blisters and rhabdomyolysis may occur after prolonged
      immobility. Pulmonary oedema, MI and cerebral oedema can occur.
      Neurological and psychiatric problems sometimes develop some weeks
      after CO poisoning, but usually improve over the following year.
      Management
      • Remove from exposure.
      • Clear the airway and maintain ventilation with as high a concentration of
        O2 as possible. For a conscious patient use a tight-ﬁtting mask with an O2
        reservoir, but if unconscious intubate and provide IPPV on 100% O2.
      • Record ECG and monitor heart rhythm: look for arrhythmias and signs
        of acute MI.
      • Check ABG—SpO2 measurements are misleading in CO poisoning, as
        are paO2 values, but acidosis indicates tissue hypoxia.
      • Check COHb levels (in blood or with a special pulse oximeter):
        although these correlate poorly with clinical features, COHb >15%
        after arrival at hospital suggests serious poisoning. COHb may be up to
        8% in smokers without CO poisoning. A nomogram (b p.395) can help
        to estimate COHb at the time of exposure.
      • Correct metabolic acidosis by ventilation and O2: try to avoid bicarbo-
        nate, which may worsen tissue hypoxia.
      • Consider mannitol if cerebral oedema is suspected.
      • Hyperbaric O2 therapy is logical, but of no proven beneﬁt for CO
        poisoning. Transfer to a hyperbaric chamber and pressurization may
        take hours and so hyperbaric treatment may be no more effective than
        ventilation on 100% normobaric O2. Caring for a critically ill patient in
        a small pressure chamber may be impracticable. Discuss with a Poisons
        Information Service (b p.181) and consider hyperbaric treatment if a
        patient has been unconscious at any time, has COHb >20%, is pregnant,
        or has cardiac complications or neurological or psychiatric features. The
        Poisons Information Service can advise on the location and telephone
        numbers of hyperbaric chambers. Some details are in Table 6.1, b p.261.
                                                    CS GAS (TEAR GAS)         209

Chlorine poisoning
Chlorine gas causes lacrimation, conjunctivitis, coughing, wheezing,
breathlessness, and chest pain. Laryngeal and pulmonary oedema may
develop within a few hours.
• Remove from exposure and give O2, with bronchodilators if necessary.
  If there is laryngeal or pulmonary oedema, consult an expert and give
  prednisolone in high dosage (adult 60–80mg/day initially). In severe
  cases, IPPV in ICU may be needed.
• If the eyes are painful, irrigate with water or saline, and examine with
  ﬂuorescein for corneal damage.
• Casualties with minor exposure to chlorine but no symptoms may be
  allowed home with advice to rest and return if symptoms develop.
• Patients with symptoms when seen in hospital usually need admission
  for at least 12 hours for observation. Record serial peak expiratory ﬂow
  rates, which may warn of deterioration.

CS gas (tear gas)
CS (orthochlorobenzylidene malononitrile) is used for riot control,
police self-protection, and sometimes as a weapon in assaults. It is an
aerosol or smoke, rather than a gas. Exposure to CS causes immediate
blepharospasm and lacrimation, uncontrollable sneezing and coughing,
a burning sensation in the skin and throat, and tightness of the chest.
Vomiting may occur. These symptoms usually disappear within 10min in
fresh air, but conjunctivitis may persist for 30min. Exposure in a conﬁned
space may cause symptoms for some hours and is particularly dangerous
in people with pre-existing lung disease. Redness or blistering of the skin
may develop, due to the solvent in the spray.
Treat patients exposed to CS gas in a well-ventilated area. Ensure that
staff wear gloves and close-ﬁtting goggles. Remove contaminated clothes
and wash affected skin thoroughly. Give O2 and bronchodilators if
necessary. Reassure the patient that the symptoms will resolve.
If the eyes are painful, blow dry air on them with a fan to vaporize any
remaining CS gas. The irritation should disappear in a few minutes.
Alternatively, irrigate the eyes with saline (although this may cause a
transient worsening of symptoms). When symptoms have settled, record
visual acuity and examine the corneas using ﬂuorescein. Refer to an
ophthalmologist if symptoms persist.
CN gas (chloroacetophenone) is used in some countries for riot control
and in personal defence devices. CN has similar effects to CS, but is more
toxic.
210    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Chemical incidents
      Chemical incidents involving single or multiple casualties may result from
      accidents (eg release of chlorine gas) or deliberate release of chemicals
      (by terrorists or others). CBRN (Chemical, Biological, Radiological and
      Nuclear) incidents have many features in common.
      If you know or suspect that a patient has been involved in a chemical
      incident:
      • Inform senior ED staff.
      • Avoid contaminating other staff or patients.
      • Ensure that you are wearing suitable personal protective equipment
         (PPE), unless the patient has already been decontaminated.
      • Decontaminate the patient according to departmental guidelines if this
         has not been done already (see b p.211).
      • Resuscitate as necessary: airway, breathing, and circulation.
      • Assess the clinical features and toxic agent.
      • Give antidotes if appropriate, and reassess the patient.
      • Enquire whether other patients are expected.
      • Inform the local Health Protection Team.
      • Get expert advice from Toxbase, Poisons Information Service (b p.181)
         or HPA Chemical Hazards and Poisons Division (ChaPD tel. 0870 606
         4444).
      • If deliberate release is suspected inform the Police and involve other
         agencies and the press ofﬁcer.
      Chemical agents which might cause a chemical incident include:
      • Chlorine—see b p.209.
      • CS gas (tear gas)—see b CS gas (tear gas), p.209.
      • Cyanide—see b p.207.
      • Organophosphates—see b p.206.
      Information about chemical incidents
      • Health Protection Agency advice on CBRN and chemical incidents:
        www.hpa.org.uk/emergency/CBRN.htm
      • TOXBASE (see b p.181) section on Deliberate Release gives details
        of toxicity and antidotes, with medical, public health and public brieﬁng
        documents about 60 chemicals that might be deliberately released.
      • Home Ofﬁce guidance on decontamination after CBRN incidents:
        http://www.cabinetofﬁce.gov.uk/ukresilience/emergencies/cbrn.aspx
      Infection control and prevention: see b p.32.
      Major incidents: see b p.38.
      Radiation incidents: see b p.268.
                                   DECONTAMINATION OF PATIENTS                211

Decontamination of patients
Decontamination after exposure to a chemical, biological, or radiation
hazard is intended to reduce the risks to the patient and to other people.
Casualties should be decontaminated at the scene after a CBRN inci-
dent, but some contaminated patients are likely to arrive at EDs without
warning. Many people will be worried about contamination, but not
actually at risk. Patients injured by industrial incidents, road trafﬁc
collisions, bombs, or other incidents may also be contaminated.
Even with advance planning it will be challenging to organize the ED, keep
‘clean’ areas clean, maintain order, and communicate between the ‘decon’
team (in PPE) and other ED staff.
Equipment for decontamination
• Scissors. Buckets. Sponges, soft brushes, wash cloths. Liquid soap.
• Disposable towels. Disposable gowns and slippers. Blankets.
• Plastic bags (large for clothing, small for valuables).
• ID labels and waterproof marking pens (for patients and property bags).
• Plastic bins with polythene liners (for used decontamination equipment).
• Warm or tepid water (hot water might increase chemical absorption).
• 0.9% saline and drip sets for eye and wound irrigation. LA eye drops.
Decontaminating non-ambulant patients
• Keep contaminated patients outside the ED.
• Clear, prepare, and secure the decontamination area.
• Protect yourself with appropriate PPE and use it properly.
• Work in teams of 2–4 people. Look after each other.
• Tell the team what to look for and what to do.
• In severe poisoning resuscitation, antidote administration, and decon-
  tamination may have to be done simultaneously.
• Tell casualties what you are doing.
• Record patient’s name and number on wrist band and property bags.
• Remove or cut off clothing (which removes 80–90% of contamination).
  Do not pull clothing off over the head.
• Fold clothing outside-in and put it in property bags.
• Put valuables in a separate bag. Wash glasses and keep with patient.
• Clean face (protecting airway), open wounds, and sites for IV access,
  then from head to toes, front and back (log roll) including skin creases.
• Rinse affected areas with soapy water (saline for wounds and eyes).
• Wipe affected areas gently with a sponge to remove chemicals.
• Rinse with clean water.
• Dry patient. Cover in gown and blanket. Transfer to ‘clean’ trolley.
• Move patient to ‘clean’ area for further assessment and treatment.
• Put contaminated equipment in appropriate containers.
• Contain waste water if possible; if not, inform water/sewage agency.
• Rest and rotate staff as needed.
• Ensure staff are decontaminated before leaving the ‘dirty’ area.
• Record names of staff involved in decontamination.
• Warn staff of possible symptoms and check for signs of poisoning.
• Debrief staff and record events.
212    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Plants, berries and mushrooms
      Plants and berries
      Many children eat plant leaves or brightly-coloured berries, but serious
      poisoning from plants is very rare. Identify the plant if possible, using
      reference books1,2,3 or the CD-ROM computer software Poisonous plants
      and fungi in Britain and Ireland (b p.180). Advice on toxicity and any nec-
      essary treatment is available from Poisons Information Services. Many
      garden and house plants are non-toxic and no treatment is needed after
      ingestion.
      Serious poisoning from laburnum is very rare, with only one death
      recorded in the UK in 50 years. No treatment needs to be provided for
      children who eat laburnum seeds, except for the very few with symptoms
      (nausea, salivation, vomiting, headache, rarely convulsions).
      Mushroom poisoning
      Serious poisoning from mushrooms or fungi is rare. Most deaths are due
      to Amanita phalloides (death cap mushroom). Reference books1,4 are
      useful, but identiﬁcation of mushrooms from the description or fragments
      available is often uncertain. Advice on toxicity and treatment is available
      from Poisons Information Services (b p.181).
      Mushrooms found in gardens are unlikely to produce severe poisoning,
      but may cause vomiting and occasionally hallucinations, usually within 2hr
      of ingestion. Mushrooms which cause symptoms within 6hr are unlikely
      to be seriously toxic. Delayed toxicity occurs with Amanita phalloides and
      some other species, which grow throughout the UK.
      Amanita phalloides poisoning causes vomiting and profuse watery diarrhoea
      after a latent period of 6–12hr, followed by hepatic and renal failure. The
      interval between ingestion and the onset of symptoms is crucial in distin-
      guishing between non-serious and potentially fatal poisoning.
      Try to ascertain if:
      • More than one variety of mushroom was eaten (since poisonous and
        edible mushrooms often grow together).
      • Whether the mushrooms were cooked (since some toxins are inacti-
        vated by heat).
      • Whether alcohol was taken (since disulﬁram-like effects may occur with
        Coprinus species, ink cap mushrooms).
      For most toxic mushrooms only symptomatic treatment is required. Activated
      charcoal may d absorption if given within 1hr. Get expert advice immediately
      if Amanita poisoning is suspected (b p.181).

      1 Cooper MR, Johnson AW, Dauncey EA (2003) Poisonous Plants and Fungi, An Illustrated Guide,
        2nd edn. TSO, London.
      2 Dauncey EA (2010) Poisonous Plants: A Guide for Childcare Providers. Royal Botanic Gardens,
        Kew.
      3 Frohne D, Pfänder HJ (2004) Poisonous Plants, 2nd edn. Manson Publishing Ltd, London.
      4 Bresinsky A, Besl H (1990). A Colour Atlas of Poisonous Fungi. CRC Press, London.
                                                     BUTTON BATTERIES           213

Button batteries
Small children often swallow button or disc batteries intended for
toys, watches, hearing aids, and other electrical equipment. The larger
batteries may become stuck in the oesophagus, causing perforation or
later stenosis. Most batteries that reach the stomach pass through the
gut without any problem. Corrosive damage could occur from electrical
discharge, but toxicity from battery contents is rare. Mercury poisoning
is very unlikely since mercuric oxide batteries are no longer sold. The
Poisons Information Service may identify the type of battery involved
from the reference number, if this is available on the packet or on a similar
battery to that ingested.
Management
X-ray the chest and abdomen or use a metal detector to ﬁnd the battery.
A battery stuck in the oesophagus should be removed immediately by
endoscopy (which allows inspection for oesophageal damage and so is
preferable to a magnet or Foley catheter).
An asymptomatic child with a battery in the stomach or bowel can be sent
home with advice to return if any symptoms develop. If the battery has not
been passed after 2 or 3 days, and is causing concern use a metal detector
or repeat X-ray to look for the battery. If it is still in the stomach (which
is rare) consider removal by endoscopy to avoid any risk of perforation or
absorption of battery contents.
Batteries in the small or large bowel almost always pass spontaneously
and should be left to do so, unless they cause symptoms. If abdominal
pain, vomiting, diarrhoea or rectal bleeding occur an abdominal X-ray is
needed to localize the battery, which may require removal by endoscopy
or surgery.
Batteries in the nose
Button batteries lodged in the nose may cause corrosive burns and
bleeding, sometimes with septal perforation after a few weeks. Liaise with
an ENT specialist to remove batteries from the nose as soon as possible.
214    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Illicit drugs
      Many drugs are used illegally as stimulants or for mood-altering effects.
      Toxicity is often seen from heroin (b p.188), cocaine, ecstasy, and related
      drugs. Street names for drugs vary and may be confusing. The Street
      Terms database (http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/streetterms) and
      Toxbase (b p.181) have lists of slang names about drugs.
      Illicit drugs vary in strength and are often mixed with other drugs or chem-
      icals, which may cause unexpected effects. Drugs may be smoked, sniffed
      (‘snorted’), swallowed or injected. Injecting drug users are at increased
      risk of hepatitis (b p.239), HIV (b p.242), necrotizing fasciitis (b p.234),
      botulism (b p.237), anthrax (b p.233) and endocarditis (b p.234).
      Ecstasy (MDMA)
      ‘Ecstasy’ (3,4-methylenedioxymetamphetamine, MDMA) is an amphetamine
      derivative used as an illegal stimulant drug. The name ‘ecstasy’ is also used
      for benzylpiperazine (BZP), another illegal drug. ‘Liquid ecstasy’ is GHB
      (b p.215). MDMA is taken orally as tablets or powder, often at raves or
      parties. Some people who have previously tolerated the drug have idiosyn-
      cratic reactions, with severe toxicity from a single MDMA tablet.
      MDMA causes release of serotonin, catecholamines and other hormones.
      Inappropriate ADH secretion, abnormal thirst, and excessive water intake
      may result in hyponatraemia and cerebral oedema, especially in women.
      Clinical features Euphoria, agitation, sweating, dilated pupils, ataxia, teeth
      grinding, headache, tachycardia, hypertension. Severe poisoning can cause
      hyperpyrexia, muscle rigidity, rhabdomyolysis, convulsions, coma, cardiac
      arrhythmias, renal failure, hepatic failure, cerebral haemorrhage, and DIC.
      Metabolic acidosis is common. Features of serotonin syndrome may occur
      as may hypoglycaemia, severe hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia.
      Treatment Consider activated charcoal (b p.185) if <1hr since ingestion.
      Observe asymptomatic patients for at least 4hr. Monitor ECG, pulse, BP and
      temperature. Record ECG, check U&E, creatinine, glucose, LFTs and CK.
      Test urine for blood. In severe cases, check ABG and coagulation.
      Supportively treat airway, breathing, and circulation. Get expert advice
      (b p.181) and ICU help in severe poisoning. Rapid sequence intubation
      may be needed because of trismus and ﬁts: use rocuronium, rather than
      succinylcholine which may cause hyperkalaemia. Control agitation with
      oral or IV diazepam or lorazepam: large doses may be needed. For severe
      hypertension, give IV diazepam and GTN. Avoid B-blockers, which may
      cause unopposed α-adrenergic stimulation with i BP and d coronary
      blood ﬂow. Do not treat single short ﬁts, but give diazepam or lorazepam
      for repeated or prolonged ﬁts.
      Correct metabolic acidosis (possibly with sodium bicarbonate), checking
      ABG and U&E. Treat hyperkalaemia (b p.162). Treat mild hyponatraemia
      by ﬂuid restriction. IV saline may be needed for severe hyponatraemia:
      rapid correction of chronic hyponatraemia can cause brain injury (central
      pontine myelinolysis), but this is less likely with acute hyponatraemia caused
      by MDMA. Cool as for heat stroke (b p.264) if hyperpyrexial. If rectal T
      >40°C, consider dantrolene 1mg/kg IV (up to 10mg/kg in 24hr). See also
      serotonin syndrome—b p.216.
                                                           ILLICIT DRUGS        215

Amphetamine
These sympathomimetic stimulants can be swallowed, snorted, smoked
or injected. Body packers may suffer severe poisoning. Toxic features are
euphoria, agitation, psychosis, sweating, dilated pupils, tachycardia, hyper-
tension, vomiting, abdominal pain, ﬁts, hyperpyrexia and metabolic acidosis.
Severe poisoning may cause stroke, MI, rhabdomyolysis, renal failure and DIC.
Cardiac arrest can occur in violent agitated patients who need physical
restraint. Treat amphetamine poisoning as for MDMA (b p.214).
Mephedrone, methedrone, M-cat
Synthetic cathinone compounds, sold as ‘plant food’ (now illegal in the
UK), are snorted or swallowed as stimulants. Toxic effects are similar to
amphetamines: agitation, sweating, tachycardia, palpitations, hypertension.
Some have nausea, hallucinations, ﬁts, muscle spasms, nausea, peripheral
vasoconstriction and myocardial ischaemia. Nasal irritation and epistaxis
may occur after snorting these drugs. Treat as for MDMA/amphetamines.
Cocaine
Cocaine base (‘crack’) is usually smoked. Cocaine salt (‘coke’) is
snorted, eaten or injected. Body packers may be poisoned if pack-
ages leak. Toxic effects (due to catecholamines, serotonin and amino
acid stimulation and sodium channel blockade) are euphoria, agitation,
delirium, ataxia, dilated pupils, sweating, vomiting, ﬁts, tachycardia,
arrhythmias and hypertension. Chest pain may be due to myocardial
ischaemia or MI (from i catecholamines, i O2 demand, coronary vaso-
spasm and thrombosis), aortic dissection or pneumothorax. Cerebral
haemorrhage, hyperpyrexia, rhabdomyolysis, renal failure, gut ischaemia
and serotonin syndrome may occur. Cocaine is a local anaesthetic, so
hot air from smoking crack can cause airway burns.
Treat as for MDMA (b p.214). Give diazepam for agitation (5–10mg
IV, repeated at 5min intervals if needed, sometimes up to 100mg). Treat
chest pain with diazepam, GTN, O2 and aspirin. GTN, calcium blockers
and phentolamine may d BP and i coronary blood ﬂow. Avoid B-blockers,
which may cause paradoxical hypertension and i coronary vasoconstriction.
If ECG suggests acute MI, consider angioplasty or thrombolysis.
Gammahydroxybutyrate (GHB, GBH, ‘liquid ecstasy’)
GHB is used illegally as a body-building agent and psychedelic drug. It is
ingested or injected. Intoxication may cause vomiting, diarrhoea, drowsi-
ness, confusion, ataxia, and agitation. Severe poisoning results in coma,
respiratory depression, ﬁts, bradycardia, and hypotension.
Treatment Consider activated charcoal (b p.185) if <1hr since ingestion.
Observe for at least 4hr and monitor pulse rate, BP and breathing. Provide
supportive treatment as needed. Control agitation and convulsions with
diazepam. Naloxone may reverse some effects of GHB.
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide)
Causes visual hallucinations, agitation, excitement, tachycardia and dilated
pupils. Hypertension and pyrexia may occur. Paranoid delusions may
require sedation. Massive overdose of LSD is rare, but may cause coma,
respiratory arrest and coagulation disturbances. Treat supportively.
216    CHAPTER 4 Toxicology

      Serotonin syndrome
      Background
      The clinical picture of serotonin syndrome is increasingly recognized
      amongst those taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
      The syndrome can occur in patients who have taken therapeutic doses
      of SSRIs, and this is especially likely if they have recently started on the
      medication or if it is taken in combination with other drugs which increase
      production, availability or release of serotonin (eg cocaine, MDMA,
      amphetamines) or reduce metabolism (eg MAOIs). Serotonin syndrome
      can also occur after an acute overdose. Numerous drugs have been
      implicated—in addition to those mentioned above, they include: tricyclic
      antidepressants, venlafaxine, tramadol, pethidine, buprenorphine, St John’s
      wort, olanzapine and lithium.
      Clinical features
      Altered mental status
      Confusion, hallucinations, and agitation may occur, with drowsiness and
      reduced conscious level in severe cases.
      Neuromuscular features
      Rigidity, shivering/tremor, teeth grinding, ataxia, and hyper-reﬂexia (especially
      affecting the lower limbs) may occur.
      Autonomic effects
      These include tachycardia, hypertension (or hypotension), ﬂushing, diarrhoea,
      vomiting and hyperthermia.
      Severe cases can result in ﬁts, rhabdomyolysis, renal failure and coagulopathy.
      Differential diagnosis
      This includes neuroleptic malignant syndrome, malignant hyperthermia,
      severe infection (eg encephalitis), other direct effects of drug overdose
      or withdrawal.
      Investigations
      Check U&E, glucose, LFTs, CK, FBC, urinalysis, ABG, ECG ± CXR.
      Treatment
      Provide supportive measures and obtain expert advice (see b p.181).
      Agitation, hyperthermia, myoclonic jerking and ﬁts may beneﬁt from diazepam
      therapy. Treat rhabdomyolyis with IV ﬂuids and urine alkalinization.
      Cyproheptadine (dose 4–8mg orally) is a serotonin receptor antagonist.
      Although data are lacking, there is a good theoretical basis for its use in
      serotonin syndrome.
                                                          BODY PACKERS          217

Body packers
Body packers try to smuggle drugs such as cocaine or heroin by ingesting
multiple packages of drugs wrapped in condoms or latex. Packages may
also be hidden in the rectum or vagina (individuals who do this are some-
times referred to as ‘body pushers’ ). Serious or even fatal poisoning may
occur if any packages leak and the drugs are absorbed.
Risk factors
Risk factors for complications occurring when an individual has concealed
drugs include:
• Vomiting, abdominal pain, abnormal vital signs.
• Clinical evidence of poisoning.
• Home made or improvised packaging.
• Large size and/or large number of packets.
• Delayed passage of the packets (beyond 48hr).
• Fragments of packets in the stool.
• Poisoning in a cotransporter.
• Previous abdominal surgery (i risk of obstruction due to adhesions).
• Concomitant drug use (especially constipating agents).
Management
Suspected body packers need careful assessment and observation. Check
for rectal and vaginal packages if the patient consents: get senior advice if
there is any problem or uncertainty about consent. Try to determine the
drug involved, and the number of packages and type of packaging used.
Observe for at least 8hr for toxic effects, monitoring heart rate, BP, ECG
and SpO2. Urine toxicology screening may detect heroin or cocaine.
Give activated charcoal (b p.185). Consider a naloxone infusion (b
p.188) for heroin body packers. Abdominal CT or X-ray may show
packets of drugs, which can be removed by whole bowel irrigation (b
p.185). Surgery may be needed for bowel obstruction or to remove
leaking packages. Avoid endoscopic removal which may damage packaging
and increase drug leakage. Advice is available from Poisons Information
Centres (b p.181).
Body stuffers
This term is sometimes applied to individuals who swallow drugs imme-
diately prior to being apprehended by the police. The quantity of drugs
ingested in this way may be less than by body packers or pushers.
However, any packaging is likely to be much less robust than that used
by body packers or pushers, thereby increasing the risk of the packages
leaking.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 5                                         219

Infectious diseases

Incubation periods                           220
Notiﬁable infectious diseases                221
Childhood infectious diseases                222
Meningitis                                   224
Gastroenteritis/food poisoning               226
Fish poisoning                               229
Infestations                                 230
Tuberculosis                                 232
Anthrax                                      233
Streptococcal infections                     234
Staphylococcal infections                    235
Tetanus                                      236
Gas gangrene                                 237
Botulism                                     237
Sexually transmitted diseases                238
Hepatitis                                    239
Leptospirosis (Weil’s disease)               239
Herpes virus infections                      240
Infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever)   241
Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)            242
Presentation of HIV +ve patients             244
Imported infectious diseases                 246
Malaria                                      247
Typhoid and paratyphoid (enteric fever)      248
Dengue                                       248
Poliomyelitis                                249
Rabies                                       249
Viral haemorrhagic fevers                    250
Severe acute respiratory syndrome            251
Inﬂuenza pandemics, avian ﬂu, and swine ﬂu   252
220    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Incubation periods
      Incubation period usually <1 week
      Staphylococcal enteritis                    1–6 hours
      Salmonella enteritis                        6–48 hours (usually 12–24 hours)
      Bacillary dysentery (Shigella)              1–7 days (usually 1–3 days)
      Botulism                                    12–96 hours (usually 18–36 hours)
      Cholera                                     12 hours–6 days (usually 1–3 days)
      Dengue                                      4–7 days
      Diphtheria                                  2–5 days
      Gas gangrene                                6 hours–4 days
      Legionnaires’ disease                       2–10 days (usually 7 days)
      Meningococcaemia                            1–7 days (usually 3 days)
      Scarlet fever                               1–4 days
      Yellow fever                                3–6 days

      Incubation period usually 1–3 weeks
      Brucellosis                             7–21 days (occasionally some months)
      Chickenpox                              10–20 days (usually about 14 days)
      Lassa fever                             6–21 days
      Leptospirosis                           2–26 days (usually 7–12 days)
      Malaria (falciparum)                    7–14 days (occasionally longer)
      Malaria (vivax, malariae, ovale)        12–40 days (occasionally >1 year)
      Measles                                 10–18 days (rash usually 14–18 days)
      Mumps                                   14–18 days
      Pertussis (whooping cough)              5–14 days (usually 7–10 days)
      Poliomyelitis                           3–21 days (usually 7–10 days)
      Rubella                                 14–21 days
      Tetanus                                 1 day–3 months (usually 4–14 days)
      Typhoid                                 3–60 days (usually 7–14 days)
      Typhus                                  7–14 days

      Incubation period usually >3 weeks
      Amoebiasis                         2 weeks–many months
      Hepatitis A                        2–6 weeks (usually 4 weeks)
      Hepatitis B, hepatitis C           6 weeks–6 months
      HIV                                2 weeks–3 months (anti-HIV appears)
      Infectious mononucleosis           4–7 weeks
      Rabies                             4 days–2 years (usually 3–12 weeks)
      Syphilis                           10 days–10 weeks (usually 3 weeks)

      Duration of infectivity of infectious diseases
      Chickenpox               3 days before rash until last vesicle crusts
      Hepatitis A              2 weeks before until 1 week after jaundice starts
      Measles                  4 days before rash until 5 days after rash appears
      Mumps                    3 days before to 1 week after salivary swelling
      Pertussis                3 days before to 3 weeks after start of symptoms
                               (5 days if on appropriate antibiotic)
      Rubella                  1 week before to 1 week after onset of rash
      Scarlet fever            10–21 days from onset of rash (1 day if on penicillin)
                                            NOTIFIABLE INFECTIOUS DISEASES      221

Notiﬁable infectious diseases
In Britain certain infectious diseases are ‘notiﬁable’. A doctor who knows
or suspects that a patient has one of these diseases is obliged to notify the
local Health Protection department. Use the special notiﬁcation form if
available. Telephone the consultant in Communicable Disease Control if
investigation or control of an outbreak may be needed.
HIV and AIDS are not notiﬁable diseases, but may be reported in strict
conﬁdence in the same way.
Notiﬁable infectious diseases in Britain (ND)
Anthrax
Botulism
Brucellosis
Cholera
Diphtheria
Encephalitis (acute)*
Erysipelas **
Food poisoning*
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS)
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type b (Hib)**
Infectious bloody diarrhoea (E. coli O157 infection**)
Infectious hepatitis (acute)*
Invasive group A streptococcal disease and scarlet fever*
Legionnaires’ disease*
Leprosy*
Malaria*
Measles
Meningitis (acute)*
Meningococcal septicaemia*/meningococcal disease**
Mumps
Necrotizing fasciitis**
Paratyphoid
Pertussis (whooping cough)
Plague
Poliomyelitis
Rabies
Rubella
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
Smallpox
Tetanus
Tuberculosis
Tularaemia**
Typhoid
Typhus*
Viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF)
West Nile fever**
Yellow fever
*
     Notiﬁable only in England and Wales.
**   Notiﬁable only in Scotland.
222    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Childhood infectious diseases
      Children at risk
      Unimmunized children are at risk of infections which would be prevented
      by the standard immunization schedule. Always ask about vaccination
      status in any febrile, unwell child. The common infectious diseases of child-
      hood can be very serious in children with immune deﬁciency or those on
      immunosuppressant drugs. Refer such children for specialist advice if they
      develop an infectious disease or have been in contact with one. Children
      with cystic ﬁbrosis can become very ill with measles, whooping cough
      or chickenpox—refer these also. Neonates rarely develop the common
      exanthems of childhood, but require referral if these occur. Chickenpox
      can be particularly serious in this age group.
      MeaslesND
      A virus infection spread by airborne droplets.
      Incubation period =10–18 days. Infectious from just before the onset of
      symptoms until 5 days after the rash appears.
      Initial features (lasting 83 days) are fever, malaise, coryza, conjunctivitis
      and cough. Koplik’s spots (small white spots like grains of salt) appear
      inside the cheeks. 1–2 days later a red maculopapular rash starts behind
      the ears, and spreads to the face and down the body.
      Treatment is symptomatic unless there are complications (eg otitis media
      or bacterial pneumonia). Febrile convulsions may occur. Encephalitis is
      rare, but can be fatal. Hospital admission is rarely needed unless the child
      is very ill or has pre-existing disease. In the tropics many malnourished
      children die from measles, but in the UK the mortality is very low.
      MumpsND
      Mumps is a virus infection spread by saliva and respiratory droplets.
      Infectivity is greatest at the onset of symptoms, but many sub-clinical cases
      also spread infection.
      Incubation period = 14–18 days.
      Typical features are fever with pain and swelling in one or both parotid
      glands. Aseptic meningitis may occur. Orchitis affects 10–15% of post-
      pubertal males, but rarely causes sterility. The pain of orchitis may be
      relieved by analgesia and a short course of steroids. Orchitis is uncommon
      before puberty, so consider torsion of the testis if a child presents with
      testicular pain and swelling (b p.700).
                                  CHILDHOOD INFECTIOUS DISEASES               223

Rubella (German measles)ND
Rubella is usually a mild disease, but infection during pregnancy may cause
severe congenital disorders, particularly eye defects, heart defects and
deafness. Guidance on the management of, and exposure to, rubella in
pregnancy is available from the Health Protection Agency based in London
(www.hpa.org.uk/infections). The virus is spread mainly by the airborne
route, with an incubation period of 2–3 weeks and infectivity from 1 week
before symptoms until 1 week after the rash appears. A macular rash
occurs on the face and trunk, with mild fever, occipital lymphadenopathy
and sometimes transient arthralgia. Rare complications are encephalitis
and thrombocytopenia.
Treatment is generally symptomatic. The clinical diagnosis of rubella
is unreliable: similar rashes may occur with enterovirus and parvovirus
infections. If there is concern about rubella infection in pregnancy take
blood for viral antibody levels and arrange urgent follow-up by the GP
or obstetrician.
Whooping cough
see b p.684.
224    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Meningitis
      Causative organisms
      Meningitis may be bacterial, viral, or occasionally fungal. Bacterial causes of
      meningitis include meningococci, pneumococci, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae,
      Listeria, and tuberculosis (TB). Other bacteria may also cause meningitis in
      neonates, the elderly, and immunosuppressed patients.
      Clinical features of bacterial meningitis
      Some patients with meningitis have the classic features of headache,
      neck stiffness, photophobia, fever and drowsiness. However, the clinical
      diagnosis of meningitis may be very difﬁcult in early cases. Neonates may
      present with anorexia, apnoea, or ﬁts. Meningitis may start as a ‘ﬂu-like’
      illness, especially in the immunosuppressed or elderly. Consider meningitis
      in any febrile patient with headache, neurological signs, neck stiffness, or
      d conscious level.
      Meningococcal meningitisND is caused by Neisseria meningitidis. It can result
      in septicaemia, coma, and death within a few hours of the ﬁrst symptoms.
      Skin rashes occur in 50% of patients, often starting as a maculopapular
      rash before the characteristic petechial rash develops. There may be DIC
      and adrenal haemorrhage (Waterhouse–Friderichsen). Meningococcal
      septicaemia (b p.666) may occur without meningitis.
      Management
      Resuscitate if necessary, give oxygen and obtain venous access.
      Start antibiotics immediately (without waiting for investigations) if
      the patient is shocked or deteriorating or there is any suspicion of
      meningococcal infection (especially a petechial or purpuric rash): give IV
      ceftriaxone or cefotaxime (adult 2g; child 80mg/kg). Chloramphenicol is
      an alternative if there is a history of anaphylaxis to cephalosporins (see
      BNF). In adults >55 years add ampicillin 2g qds to cover Listeria. Give
      vancomycin ± rifampicin if penicillin-resistant pneumococcal infection is
      suspected. Give IV dexamethasone (0.15mg/kg, max 10mg, qds for 4 days)
      starting with or just before the ﬁrst dose of antibiotics, especially if pneu-
      mococcal meningitis is suspected.
      Initial investigations are FBC, U&E, glucose, clotting screen, ABG, CRP,
      blood cultures, EDTA sample for PCR, and clotted blood for serology.
      LP is needed if meningitis is suspected, unless there is a coagulopathy
      or i ICP: do CT scan if there is suspicion of i ICP (confusion/coma,
      hypertension, bradycardia or papilloedema) or focal neurological signs.
      Provide supportive treatment including:
      • IV ﬂuids.
      • Pressure area care.
      • Monitor conscious level, T°, BP, ECG, SpO2, and ﬂuid balance.
      Get expert help promptly and organize ICU care.
      For the latest advice and algorithms see www.meningitis.org and
      www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG102/quickrefguide
      For meningitis and LP in children see b p.666.
                                                               MENINGITIS         225

Prophylaxis of meningococcal infection
While intubating a patient with suspected meningococcal infection wear a
suitable mask (eg FFP3) and a face shield to reduce the risk of infection.
Meningococcal infection is spread by droplets from the nose of an infected
carrier, who may be well. Notify the consultant in Communicable Disease
Control (b p.221) immediately about any suspected meningococcal
infection and obtain advice about antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylactic
antibiotics (rifampicin, ciproﬂoxacin or ceftriaxone) are needed for the
patient’s family and close contacts. Hospital and ambulance staff do not
need prophylaxis unless they have given mouth to mouth ventilation or
intubated the patient without using protective equipment.
Rifampicin is given 12 hourly for 2 days (5mg/kg for child aged <1 year;
10mg/kg at 1–12 years; 600mg at age >12 years. It makes the urine orange
or brown, discolours soft contact lenses, and d effectiveness of OCP for
84 weeks (see BNF)—give appropriate warnings and record this in the
notes.
Ciproﬂoxacin is given as a single oral dose of 500mg (adults), 250mg (child
5–12 years) or 125mg (child 2–5 years), although it is not licensed for
chemoprophylaxis of meningitis.
Ceftriaxone is given as a single IM dose of 250mg (adults and children
>12 years) or 125mg (children <12 years).
Tell contacts of meningococcal patients to report to a doctor at once if
they develop symptoms.
TB meningitis
Often gradual onset, with malaise, anorexia, vomiting, headache and even-
tually signs of meningitis. Cranial nerve palsies, spastic paraplegia and coma
can occur. Meningitis may be part of miliary TB (b p.232), which may be
apparent on chest X-ray. Ophthalmoscopy may show choroidal tubercles
and papilloedema, which is found more commonly than in other forms of
meningitis. Refer for specialist investigation and treatment.
Viral meningitis
Viral causes of meningitis include coxsackie, mumps, and echoviruses.
Viral meningitis produces similar clinical features to bacterial infection, but
the illness is often less severe. The initial management is the same as for
suspected bacterial meningitis. Refer for admission and investigation.
Fungal meningitis
Fungal meningitis is usually part of disseminated infection in immuno-
suppressed patients, (eg those with AIDS (b p.242), lymphoma, or on
steroid therapy). Cryptococcus neoformans is the commonest organism.
Symptoms usually develop slowly, as with TB meningitis. There may be
papilloedema and focal neurological signs. Admit for specialist investiga-
tion and treatment.
226    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Gastroenteritis/food poisoningND: 1
      Diarrhoea is the usual presenting symptom of gastroenteritis, but it may
      also occur in many other conditions as diverse as otitis media, appendicitis
      and ulcerative colitis. Antibiotics often cause diarrhoea. Constipation may
      present as diarrhoea if there is overﬂow around an obstructing stool.
      A rectal tumour may present similarly.
      A baby’s parents may seek advice about diarrhoea when in fact the stools
      are normal. Breast-fed babies almost always have loose stools, which may
      be yellow or green and very frequent, often after every feed. However,
      gastroenteritis is very rare in fully breast-fed babies. In children aged
      >6 months, normal stool frequency ranges from 1 stool on alternate days
      to 3 stools daily.
      Diarrhoea and vomiting may be caused by many types of bacteria and viruses,
      and also by some toxins and poisons. Many episodes of gastroenteritis result
      from contaminated food, usually meat, milk or egg products, which have
      been cooked inadequately or left in warm conditions. The speciﬁc cause
      is often not identiﬁed. Some infections are spread by faecal contamination
      of water (eg cryptosporidiosis from sheep faeces). Rotavirus infection
      (common in children) may be transmitted by the respiratory route. Severe
      illness with bloody diarrhoea, haemolysis and renal failure may result from
      infection with verocytotoxin producing E. coli (VTEC O157).
      Stool microscopy and culture are unnecessary in most cases of gastro-
      enteritis, but obtain them if the patient has been abroad, is severely
      ill, has prolonged symptoms, comes from an institution or works as a
      food-handler.
      Food poisoning is a notiﬁable disease (b p.221). Immediate notiﬁcation
      by telephone is mandatory if an outbreak is suspected. The food eaten,
      symptoms and incubation period may suggest the organism or toxin
      involved (see Table 5.1). Carbon monoxide poisoning (b p.208)
      may cause malaise and vomiting in several members of a family and be
      misdiagnosed as food poisoning.
      History
      Record the duration of symptoms and the frequency and description of
      stools and vomit. Document other symptoms (eg abdominal pain, fever),
      food and ﬂuid ingested and drugs taken. Enquire about affected contacts,
      foreign travel and occupation (especially relevant if a food-handler).
      Examination
      Look for abdominal tenderness, fever and other signs of infection. Record
      the patient’s weight and compare this with any previous records. Assess
      the degree of dehydration—this is traditionally classiﬁed as mild (<5%),
      moderate (5–10%), or severe (>10%), as outlined opposite.
                                   GASTROENTERITIS/FOOD POISONING ND : 1               227

Clinical evidence of mild dehydration (<5%)
• Thirst.
• d urinary output (in a baby <4 wet nappies in 24hr).
• Dry mouth.
Clinical evidence of moderate dehydration (5–10%)
• Sunken fontanelle in infants.
• Sunken eyes.
• Tachypnoea due to metabolic acidosis.
• Tachycardia.
Clinical evidence of severe dehydration (>10%)
• d skin turgor on pinching the skin.
• Drowsiness/irritability.

Table 5.1 Food poisoning characteristics
Cause                      Incubation      Food            Symptoms*
Staph. aureus              1–6 hours       Meat, milk      D, V, P, shock
Bacillus cereus            1–16 hours      Rice            D, V, P
Salmonella                 6–48 hours      Meat, eggs      D, V, P
Escherichia coli           1–2 days        Any food        D, V, P
E. coli VTEC 0157          1–2 days        Meat, milk      D, V, P
Campylobacter              1–3 days        Meat, milk      Fever, P, D
Shigella                   1–3 days        Any food        Bloody D, V, fever
Vibrio parahaem            2–3 days        Seafood         Watery D
Cholera                    12hr–6 days     Water, seafood D (watery), shock
Rotavirus                  1–7 days                        D, V, fever, cough
Botulism                   12–96 hours     Preserved food V, paralysis
Histamine                  <1 hour         Fish            Flushing, headache,
ﬁsh poisoning                                              D, V, P (b p.229)
(scombrotoxin)
Ciguatera ﬁsh              1–6 hours       Fish from       D, V, P, paraesthesiae,
poisoning                  (rarely         tropical        muscle weakness (b p.229)
                           30 hours)       coral reef
Paralytic shellﬁsh         30 min–         Shellﬁsh        Dizziness, paraesthesiae,
poisoning                  10 hours                        weakness, respiratory
                                                           failure (b p.229)
Chemicals                  <2 hours        Food, water     Various
Mushrooms                  <24 hours       Mushrooms       D, V, P, hallucinations
                                                           (b p.212)
*
    D = diarrhoea, V = vomiting, P = abdominal pain.
228    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Gastroenteritis/food poisoningND: 2
      Treatment
      Most cases are self-limiting, but careful attention is needed to ensure
      adequate ﬂuid replacement and also to prevent cross-infection (b p.32).
      Hospital treatment is needed if the patient looks seriously ill, dehydration
      is >5%, there is a high fever or the family are unlikely to cope with the
      patient at home. Babies aged <3 months may be difﬁcult to assess and
      can deteriorate rapidly—refer for admission. Severely dehydrated (>10%)
      children need immediate IV ﬂuids, initially 0.9% saline (10–20mL/kg over
      5min, repeated as necessary).
      Oral rehydration therapy (ORT) is effective in most patients with gastro-
      enteritis (<5% dehydration). Standard ORT products (eg Dioralyte®)
      contain glucose, sodium, potassium, chloride and citrate (details in BNF).
      Glucose is important to enhance absorption of sodium and water.
      Usual dose of ORT:        infant 1–1½ times usual feed volume.
                                child 200mL after each loose stool.
                                adults 200–400mL after each loose stool.
      Extra ORT can be given if the patient is still thirsty. Frequent small sips
      are usually tolerated better than a large drink. Check that the patient (or
      parent/carer) can understand the instructions supplied with the ORT
      sachets or effervescent tablets and can measure the necessary amounts
      of clean water.
      Recommence normal feeds and diet after 24hr (or earlier if diarrhoea
      has settled or the patient is hungry). Give further ORT if the diarrhoea
      continues. A child with acute diarrhoea requires daily review (usually by the
      GP), but should be seen earlier if he becomes more ill (especially if drowsy
      or pyrexial), or if vomiting and/or diarrhoea worsens. Home-made salt and
      sugar mixtures may be dangerously inaccurate for ORT, but if nothing else
      is available, one could use salt 2.5mL (half a 5mL spoonful) and sugar 20mL
      (4 × 5mL spoonfuls) in 1 pint (500mL) of cooled boiled water.
      Drugs other than ORT are rarely needed in gastroenteritis. In adults an
      anti-emetic (prochlorperazine 12.5mg IM or 3mg buccal) may be helpful,
      but in children prochlorperazine often causes troublesome side effects.
      However, oral ondansetron (0.1–0.15mg/kg, max 8mg) reduces vomiting
      and the need for IV ﬂuids and admission. Prolonged vomiting requires
      investigation and hospital admission.
      Anti-diarrhoeal drugs (eg kaolin, codeine phosphate, loperamide) are
      contraindicated in children and rarely needed in adults: they may aggravate
      nausea and vomiting and occasionally cause ileus.
      Antibiotics are only needed in special circumstances. Most episodes
      of gastroenteritis are brief and many are caused by viruses and not helped
      by antibiotics. Patients with amoebiasis, giardiasis, Campylobacter or
      Shigella infections may need antibiotics: refer to an Infectious Diseases
      unit for treatment and follow-up. Antibiotics are occasionally useful in
      traveller’s diarrhoea before a long journey or an important meeting:
      trimethoprim (200mg bd PO for 5 days) or ciproﬂoxacin (500mg bd PO
      for 2 days: see the BNF or data sheet about side effects and warnings).
                                                         FISH POISONING          229

Fish poisoning
Histamine ﬁsh poisoning
Also known as scombroid ﬁsh poisoning or scombrotoxin poisoning, this
is caused by ingesting toxins in ﬁsh such as tuna, mackerel, and other dark-
meat ﬁsh, which have been stored improperly. If the ﬁsh is not cooled
rapidly after it is caught, an enzyme in bacteria converts histidine into his-
tamine and other toxins, which are heat-stable and so are unaffected by
cooking. The patient may notice that the ﬁsh tastes metallic, bitter, or
peppery and the ﬂesh looks honeycombed. Symptoms start within a few
minutes to 2 hours, with ﬂushing of the face and upper body, headache,
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, dizziness and palpitations.
Urticaria and bronchospasm are less common. The symptoms usually
settle within 6 hours without treatment, but resolve more quickly with
antihistamines (eg chlorphenamine 10mg IV in adults, 250 micrograms/kg
in children). In severe cases cimetidine and, rarely, adrenaline might be
needed, with oxygen, IV ﬂuids and bronchodilators.
The patient should be told that histamine ﬁsh poisoning is caused by
improper ﬁsh handling and storage. It is not an allergic reaction and so the
patient would not have to avoid eating ﬁsh in future.
Ciguatera ﬁsh poisoning
This is caused by a neurotoxin called ciguatoxin which is produced by
a dinoﬂagellate (a unicellular plankton) associated with coral reefs. Fish
imported from the tropics may cause ciguatera poisoning in the UK and
elsewhere. Symptoms usually start 1–6 hours after ingestion with nausea,
vomiting, watery diarrhoea and abdominal pain, followed by neurological
symptoms, including paraesthesiae of the lips, tongue and feet, ataxia and
muscle weakness. A classic feature is paradoxical temperature reversal
(cold objects feel hot and hot objects feel cold). Alcohol makes these
symptoms worse. Bradycardia and hypotension may occur. Treatment is
symptomatic and supportive. Gastro-intestinal symptoms usually settle
within 1 day, but paraesthesiae may persist for weeks or months.
Paralytic shellﬁsh poisoning
This can be caused by eating molluscs such as mussels, clams, cockles and
scallops which concentrate a neurotoxin called saxitoxin produced by
dinoﬂagellate plankton. This plankton proliferates when sea temperatures
rise in summer and may make the sea look red (‘red tide’). Symptoms
start 30 minutes to 10 hours after ingestion, with dizziness, ataxia, paraes-
thesiae and muscle weakness, which may progress to respiratory failure.
Treatment is supportive, with assisted ventilation if necessary. Complete
recovery is usual within 24 hours.
230    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Infestations
      Worms
      The most common helminthic infection seen in the UK is the thread-
      worm Enterobius vermicularis. This causes anal itching, especially at night.
      Sometimes intact worms (length 5–13mm, diameter 0.1–0.5mm) are seen
      in the faeces. Unwashed ﬁngers transmit ova from the perianal skin to the
      mouth. Personal hygiene is important in treatment and in prevention of
      reinfection (hand-washing and nail-scrubbing before each meal and after
      every visit to the toilet). A bath immediately after getting up removes
      ova laid overnight. All members of the family require treatment with
      mebendazole or piperazine (see BNF).
      Other helminthic infections include roundworms, hookworms and
      tapeworms. Obtain advice from departments of Infectious Diseases or
      Tropical Medicine (see b p.246).
      Lice
      Humans may be infected by the body louse (Pediculosis humanis corporis),
      head louse (Pediculosis humanis capitis), or the ‘crab’/pubic louse (Phthirus
      pubis).
      Head lice are common in school children. Infection is not related to lack
      of hygiene or the length of hair. Adult lice are 3–4mm long, vary in colour
      from white to grey-black and attach themselves ﬁrmly to the scalp at the
      base of hairs. The egg cases (‘nits’) are white and 1–2mm in diameter,
      glued ﬁrmly to the base of hairs and moving outwards as the hair
      grows. Head lice cause intense itching, which may suggest the diagnosis.
      Secondary infection may result in impetigo. Head lice are usually treated
      with malathion, phenothrin or simeticone, repeated after 7 days (see
      BNF). Drug-resistant lice occur in some areas. Wet combing to remove
      head lice takes time and is possibly less effective than drug treatment.
      Infection by body lice is related to poor hygiene and infrequent washing
      of clothes. Body lice are found in the seams of clothing, and sometimes
      in body hair. Treatment is with malathion. Clothes can be disinfected
      by boiling or by machine laundering and ironing. Body lice may transmit
      ricketsial diseases (louse-borne typhus) and other infections.
      Crab lice are usually transmitted sexually. They cause itching in pubic hair
      areas. Occasionally, children become infested on eyelashes or eyebrows.
      Treat with permethrin or malathion (see BNF). Sexual partners or other
      family members may also need treatment. There may be other co-existing
      sexually transmitted diseases.
      Fleas
      There are many different types of ﬂea. They cause itchy bites with linear
      erythematous papules. Treat with calamine lotion and an oral antihista-
      mine (eg chlorphenamine) if itching is severe. A long-acting insecticide is
      needed in the house, especially in cracks in the ﬂoor and under furniture.
      All household cats and dogs must be treated for ﬂeas. Fleas can transmit
      many infections, including plague, typhus and Q fever.
                                                          INFESTATIONS         231

Scabies
Scabies is caused by infestation with a mite, Sarcoptes scabiei, which is
about 0.2–0.4mm long and burrows into the skin. It is most often found in
the ﬁnger webs and on the ﬂexor aspect of the wrists. After 4–6 weeks,
intense itching occurs, especially at night or after a hot shower. Burrows
(3–15mm long) may be apparent, especially on palpation of affected skin.
Genital lesions are reddish and nodular. Secondary bacterial infection
may occur. Scabies can be conﬁrmed by microscopy of scrapings from
suspected lesions. Treat with permethrin or malathion (see BNF). Treat
all members of the household at once. Calamine lotion and an oral
antihistamine may help to relieve itching.
Ticks
Ticks may be acquired from domestic animals or while walking through
undergrowth or exploring caves. Ticks may be removed with tweezers
or curved forceps. They can carry several diseases, including Lyme
disease (see below), tick-borne encephalitis, typhus, and Rocky Mountain
spotted fever. Tick paralysis occurs in North America and Australia,
with progressive paralysis which is often misdiagnosed as poliomyelitis.
However, the risk of infection from tick bites is low in most areas, and so
routine prophylaxis with antibiotics is not recommended.
Lyme disease (Lyme borreliosis) is caused by a tick-borne spirochaete,
Borrelia burgdorferi, and occurs in the UK, most of Europe, the USA, and
parts of Asia and Australia. Most cases occur in the summer and early
autumn, and are transmitted by ticks from deer or sheep. The initial tick
bite may go unnoticed. Clinical illness develops after about 7–14 days
(range 2–30 days) with an expanding red area around the site of the bite
(erythema migrans). The second clinical stage of the disease occurs some
weeks or months later, with fever, muscle and joint pains, and sometimes
facial palsy or other cranial nerve or peripheral nerve palsies. Meningitis,
encephalitis and arthritis may develop. Myocarditis and heart block occur
occasionally. Refer to an Infectious Diseases specialist for conﬁrmation
and treatment if Lyme disease is suspected.
232    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      TuberculosisND
      The Mycobacterium genus is characterized by acid-fast staining (ie it is not
      decolourized by acid after staining with hot carbol fuchsin).
      Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis is common throughout the
      world. There is growing concern about the re-emergence of TB in the UK
      and other countries. Many cases of TB occur in the lower socio-economic
      groups, ethnic minorities and the immunocompromised.
      The incidence of TB i with age.
      Presentation
      TB can involve almost any organ of the body.
      Primary infection is usually pulmonary and often asymptomatic.
      Post-primary infection may present with malaise, weight loss and night
      sweats, with localized symptoms depending on the organs involved.
      Pulmonary TB may result in cough, haemoptysis, pneumonia and pleural
      effusion (b p.103).
      Miliary TB, with blood-borne infection of many organs, develops over
      1–2 weeks with fever, weight loss, malaise and breathlessness: CXR may
      show multiple small opacities throughout the lung ﬁelds, and choroidal
      tubercles may be visible in the optic fundi.
      TB meningitis causes headaches and vomiting, sometimes with neck
      stiffness, cranial nerve palsies and papilloedema (see b p.224).
      Tuberculous osteomyelitis usually affects the spine, with collapse of
      adjacent vertebrae and a paravertebral abscess.
      Patients may present with swollen lymph nodes from tuberculous
      lymphadenitis or with sinuses or cold abscesses from bone or soft tissue
      infection: microscopy of the discharge will show acid-fast bacilli.
      Treatment
      Refer patients with suspected TB to an appropriate specialist for
      assessment and treatment. Isolation is required for patients with untreated
      pulmonary TB. Notify the local Health Protection department (b p.221).
                                                             ANTHRAX ND         233

AnthraxND
Anthrax is caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis which affects cows
and other herbivorous animals, especially in warm climates. The bacte-
rium forms spores, which may remain infective for years. Most human
cases of anthrax are cutaneous anthrax caused by direct skin contact with
infected tissues and occur in people working with animal products such as
imported hides. Less common, but more serious, are inhalation anthrax
caused by inhalation of anthrax spores, and intestinal anthrax which is a
rare form of food poisoning caused by under-cooked infected meat.
Anthrax spores released deliberately in terrorist attacks could cause
cutaneous anthrax or inhalation anthrax, which is often fatal.
Cutaneous anthrax starts 2–7 days after infection, with a red papule
which develops into an ulcer with a black leathery eschar, surrounded
by non-pitting oedema. The lesion is painless but may itch. Small satellite
lesions may surround the original lesion. Malaise and fever may occur,
with septicaemia in 10–20% of cases. Penicillin d risk of complications
from cutaneous anthrax. Clinical diagnosis is conﬁrmed by microscopy
and culture of the pustule.
Inhalation anthrax starts within 48 hours of exposure (rarely up to 6
weeks) with a ﬂu-like illness, followed by breathlessness, cyanosis, stridor
and sweating, often with subcutaneous oedema of the chest and neck.
CXR and CT show mediastinal widening from lymphadenopathy and
pleural effusions. Shock, septicaemia and meningitis are common and
usually fatal, despite antibiotics and intensive treatment.
Airborne transmission of anthrax from one person to another does
not occur, but cutaneous anthrax could result from direct contact with
anthrax lesions. Obtain expert advice immediately if anthrax is suspected.
It is a notiﬁable disease (b p.221). Post-exposure antibiotics can prevent
anthrax if started early enough. Press enquiries must be anticipated after
any case of anthrax, especially if anthrax has been released deliberately.
Further information is available from: www.hpa.org.uk/infections.
Anthrax in drug users After a serious anthrax outbreak in heroin users
in Scotland in 2010, Health Protection Scotland (www.hps.scot.nhs.uk)
advised doctors to suspect anthrax in a drug user presenting with any of
the following:
• Severe soft tissue infection and/or signs of severe sepsis/meningitis.
• Clinical features of inhalational anthrax.
• Respiratory symptoms + features of meningitis or intracranial bleeding.
• GI symptoms (eg pain, bleeding, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, ascites).
Approach Get expert help early to advise on management (microbiology,
hospital infection control team, Public Health, ICU, surgeons). Start IV
antibiotics according to advice (eg combination of ciproﬂoxacin,
clindamycin + penicillin, or if there is soft tissue infection: ciproﬂoxacin,
clindamycin, penicillin, ﬂucloxacillin + metronidazole). Experts will advise
on whether to use anthrax immune globulin.
234    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Streptococcal infections
      Streptococcus pyogenes and other streptococci may reside in the pharynx
      without symptoms, but can cause sore throats (b p.554), soft tissue
      infections (b pp.413 and 528), scarlet fever, and occasionally endocar-
      ditis and septicaemia. Later, non-suppurative sequelae of streptococcal
      infections include erythema nodosum, rheumatic fever (b p.496) and
      glomerulonephritis. Streptococci and Staphylococci may cause necrotizing
      fasciitis, impetigo, and toxic shock.
      Scarlet feverND
      Some streptococcal infections are associated with scarlet fever. A diffuse
      blanching scarlet rash often involves the neck, chest, axillae and groin.
      Occlusion of sweat glands makes the skin feel rough, like sandpaper.
      During the ﬁrst 1–2 days of illness there is a ‘white strawberry tongue’,
      with red papillae protruding through white furry material. After a few days
      the white fur separates, leaving a shiny ‘raspberry tongue’. 10–14 days after
      onset of the rash, skin may peel from palms and soles. Treat with penicillin
      or erythromycin for 14 days. Complete recovery is usual.
      Infective endocarditis
      Endocarditis may develop on previously normal heart valves, as well as on
      diseased or prosthetic valves. The commonest organism is Strep. viridans, but
      many others have been implicated. Many acute cases present with heart failure
      and involve Staphylococcus aureus. Injecting drug users are liable to staphyloco-
      ccal infection of the tricuspid valve, with fever and pneumonia from septic PE.
      Clinical features Fever and changing murmurs suggest endocarditis.
      Emboli may cause strokes. Ask about weight loss, malaise, night sweats.
      Look for clubbing, splinter haemorrhages, splenomegaly, anaemia,
      microscopic haematuria.
      Treatment On suspicion of endocarditis, admit immediately for
      investigation (blood cultures, echocardiography) and treatment.
      Cellulitis and erysipelas
      Treat these bacterial skin infections as described in b p.528.
      Necrotizing fasciitis
      This is a rare and severe bacterial infection of soft tissues. It can occur
      with or without obvious trauma and may follow illicit IM heroin injection
      (‘muscle popping’). Strep. pyogenes is often involved, sometimes with
      Staph. aureus or other bacteria. Often there are both aerobic and
      anaerobic organisms. Infection involves fascia and subcutaneous tissues,
      with gas formation and development of gangrene. Infection may spread
      to adjacent muscles, causing myonecrosis or pyogenic myositis. Similar
      infections may involve the abdomen and groin (Fournier’s gangrene).
      Initial symptoms and signs may be vague, with very severe pain, but little
      to ﬁnd on examination: the affected area may be tender, sometimes with
      slight erythema and swelling. The patient is usually pyrexial. Infection can
      spread rapidly and cause marked soft tissue swelling with discolouration,
      bruising, haemorrhagic blisters, or overlying skin necrosis. Toxic shock
      may develop and the mortality rate is high. X-rays may show gas in the
      soft tissues but may be normal.
      Treatment involves resuscitation with IV ﬂuids and antibiotics (penicillin
      and clindamycin), urgent surgery to debride the affected area and excise
      necrotic tissues, and intensive care.
                                       STAPHYLOCOCCAL INFECTIONS                 235

Staphylococcal infections
Staphylococcus aureus is involved in many infections of wounds, soft tissues
(b p.413), joints and bones (b p.494 and 705). Staphylococci may
also cause impetigo, scalded skin syndrome, food poisoning, toxic shock
syndrome, endocarditis, pneumonia, septicaemia and meningitis.
Impetigo
A highly infectious superﬁcial skin infection caused by staphylococci or
streptococci. It may involve normal skin or complicate a pre-existing
condition, such as eczema or scabies. Lesions often start around the
mouth and nose, spreading rapidly on the face and to other parts of the
body. Irregular golden-yellow crusted lesions occur, particularly in strep-
tococcal infections. Staphylococci may cause bullous impetigo, with bullae
containing pus which rupture and dry to form crusts. Treat with topical
fusidic acid or mupirocin (usually for 7 days, max. 10 days) and give oral
ﬂucloxacillin or erythromycin if lesions are widespread or there is cellulitis
or pyrexia.
Scalded skin syndrome
Staph. aureus may produce an exotoxin causing separation of the outer
layers of the epidermis, large sections of which slide off with minimal
pressure, leaving large raw areas resembling a severe scald. Drug allergies
can cause similar lesions. Most cases of scalded skin syndrome (toxic
epidermal necrolysis, Lyell’s syndrome) occur in children. Admit for
nursing and medical care.
Toxic shock syndrome
This is caused by exotoxins from Staph. aureus or (less commonly)
Strep. pyogenes. Some cases during menstruation are related to tampons,
other cases occur after surgical operations, burns, other trauma, or local
infections. There is high fever, a generalized erythematous rash, confusion,
diarrhoea, muscle pains, hypotension, and renal failure. Subsequently,
scales of skin separate from hands and feet. Death may occur from multiple
organ failure. Treat for septic shock with IV ﬂuids and anti-staphylococcal
antibiotics. Remove tampons and send for culture. Refer to ICU. Involve a
surgeon if an associated abscess requires drainage.
Staphylococcal septicaemia
Occurs particularly in debilitated or immune-compromised patients
and in injecting drug users. There may be endocarditis with metastatic
infection of lungs, bone or soft tissues and gangrene due to emboli or
arterial thrombosis. Signs of meningitis and DIC may suggest meningo-
coccal septicaemia (b p.224) and the rash may be similar.
Meticillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
MRSA causes particular concern because of antibiotic resistance and is
carried by many asymptomatic people (patients and staff). Transmission
is minimized by hand washing (b p.32) and other infection control
measures. An information leaﬂet about MRSA for patients is available at
www.hpa.org.uk/infections/topics_az/staphylo/mrsa_leaﬂet.htm
236    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      TetanusND
      An acute and often fatal disease, common in much of Asia, Africa, and
      South America, especially in neonates. Now rare in developed coun-
      tries: 30–40 cases/year in UK, many involving the elderly. Injecting drug
      users (eg those ‘skin popping’) are also at particular risk. Spores of the
      Gram +ve organism Clostridium tetani (common in soil and animal faeces)
      contaminate a wound, which may be trivial. The spores germinate in
      anaerobic conditions, producing tetanospasmin, an exotoxin which blocks
      inhibitory neurones in the CNS and causes muscle spasm and rigidity.
      Incubation period is usually 4–14 days, but may be 1 day to 3 months.
      In 20% of cases there is no known wound. Tetanus occasionally occurs
      after surgery or IM injections.
      Clinical features
      Stiffness of masseter muscles causes difﬁculty in opening the mouth
      (trismus, lockjaw). Muscle stiffness may spread to all facial and skeletal
      muscles and muscles of swallowing. Characteristically, the eyes are partly
      closed, the lips pursed and stretched (risus sardonicus). Spasm of chest
      muscles may restrict breathing. There may be abdominal rigidity, stiff-
      ness of limbs and forced extension of the back (opisthotonus). In severe
      cases, prolonged muscle spasms affect breathing and swallowing. Pyrexia
      is common. Autonomic disturbances cause profuse sweating, tachycardia
      and hypertension, alternating with bradycardia and hypotension. Cardiac
      arrhythmias and arrest may occur.
      Differential diagnoses
      Dystonic reaction to metoclopramide or phenothiazines, strychnine
      poisoning, quinsy, dental abscess, meningitis, rabies. Procyclidine relieves
      muscle spasms from drug-induced dystonia, but will not affect tetanus;
      diazepam may relieve dystonia or tetanic spasms.
      Management
      Obtain senior medical and anaesthetic help. Monitor breathing, ECG and
      BP. Refer to ICU. Control spasms with diazepam. Paralyse and ventilate if
      breathing becomes inadequate. Clean and debride wounds. Give penicillin
      and metronidazole and human tetanus immune globulin.
      Prognosis
      Depends on severity of disease and quality of care. Short incubation
      (<4 days) and rapid progression suggest severe disease with a high mortality.
      With expert intensive care, the mortality in adults is <10%, but neonatal
      tetanus is often fatal.
      Immunization
      Tetanus is eminently preventable by immunization and by proper care of
      wounds (b p.406, b p.410).
                                                             BOTULISM ND        237

Gas gangrene
This is a rapidly spreading infection of muscle caused by toxin-producing
Clostridial bacteria (anaerobic Gram +ve bacilli), usually C. perfringens.
It is fatal if untreated. It may involve wounds of the buttocks, amputa-
tions for vascular disease or severe muscle injuries (eg gunshot wounds).
Occasionally gas gangrene of the perineum occurs without trauma.
Incubation period is usually <4 days (sometimes a few hours). Sudden
severe pain occurs at the wound site. Generalized toxicity develops,
with tachycardia, sweating and fever. Swelling and skin discolouration
occur around the wound, with a serous ooze, marked tenderness and
sometimes haemorrhagic vesicles and crepitus. Shock and renal failure
develop, with death often within 2 days of the ﬁrst symptoms.
Diagnosis depends on clinical features. Severe pain necessitates wound
inspection (remove or window any plaster of paris (POP). Obtain
immediate senior surgical advice if gas gangrene is suspected. The wound
discharge may contain Gram +ve bacilli. X-rays may show soft tissue gas,
but its absence does not exclude gas gangrene.
Treatment IV antibiotics (penicillin and clindamycin), immediate surgical
removal of all infected tissue, and intensive care. Hyperbaric O2 and gas
gangrene antitoxin are rarely available and of no proven beneﬁt.

BotulismND
The exotoxin of Clostridium botulinum paralyses autonomic and motor
nerves by blocking acetylcholine release at neuromuscular junctions and
nerve synapses. Infection occurs from eating tinned or preserved food
contaminated with C. botulinum spores: cases have involved sausage,
tinned salmon, hazelnut yoghurt and other foods. Rarely, C. botulinum
infects wounds or colonizes the gut. Injecting drug users may develop
botulism after IM or SC injections of contaminated drugs.
Incubation period is 12–72hr. Initial symptoms may be GI (nausea, vomiting,
abdominal discomfort, dryness of the mouth) or neurological (dizziness,
blurred vision, diplopia). Later problems include dysarthria, dysphagia,
muscle weakness or paralysis, constipation and urinary retention, respiratory
failure, and sudden death. Susceptibility varies: some people who eat
contaminated food develop no symptoms or suffer only mild fatigue.
Clinical signs result from involvement of autonomic and motor nerves:
dry mouth, cranial nerve palsies (ptosis, squint, ﬁxed pupils, weakness of
tongue), limb weakness with ﬂacid muscles. Consciousness and sensation
are preserved. Hypotension and ileus may occur. Fever is unusual.
Differential diagnoses are Guillain–Barré syndrome, myasthenia, brainstem
stroke, diphtheria, poisoning (anticholinergics or organophosphates),
paralytic rabies. Botulism may be misdiagnosed as staphylococcal food
poisoning, paralytic shellﬁsh poisoning, CO or mushroom poisoning.
Management Get senior help. Assess breathing, ventilate if necessary and
admit to ICU. Botulinum antitoxin reduces mortality and morbidity: see BNF
and TOXBASE (b p.181). Inform Public Health: others who have eaten
contaminated food may need urgent treatment. Anticipate media enquiries
and the arrival of worried people with tins of suspicious food.
238    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Sexually transmitted diseases
      The commonest sexually transmitted disease (STD) is non-speciﬁc genital
      infection. Other common diseases include chlamydia, gonorrhoea, genital
      herpes, trichomoniasis, genital warts, pediculosis pubis, HIV, and syphilis.
      Many patients have more than one disease. Suspicion of STD necessi-
      tates prompt referral to a genitourinary (GU) medicine clinic for proper
      diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of the patient and contacts. Some GU
      departments provide an on-call service. Only prescribe antibiotics for
      suspected STDs on the advice of a GU specialist.
      Genital ulcers and sores
      Most genital ulcers/erosions are either multiple and painful or single
      and painless. In the UK, multiple genital ulcers are most often due to
      herpes simplex; other causes are Behçet’s disease and (rarely) chancroid
      or scabies. Multiple painful sores may occur with gonorrhoea, candida,
      or other conditions. Painless genital ulceration should suggest syphilis
      (primary chancre is a single ulcer, secondary syphilis often multiple:
      both are highly infectious and incidence has i recently). Other causes of
      painless ulcers include carcinoma and trauma (possibly self-inﬂicted).
      Urethritis
      In men, dysuria and urethral discharge are the commonest presenting
      symptoms of an STD. However, 5–10% of men with gonococcal or
      non-gonococcal urethritis have no symptoms. Urethritis may result from
      physical trauma, foreign bodies or attempts at self-treatment with intra-
      urethral chemicals.
      Gonorrhoea usually has a shorter incubation period (3–5 days) than non-
      gonococcal urethritis (eg chlamydia 7–14 days), but do not rely on a clinical
      diagnosis: refer to a GU clinic for diagnosis, management and follow-up.
      If no GU advice is available and treatment cannot wait for attendance at
      a GU clinic, give doxycycline 200mg PO stat and then 100mg PO daily (or
      tetracycline 500mg PO qds). If possible, make a glass slide of the discharge,
      dried in air, for the patient to take to the clinic. He should be told not to
      pass urine for 4 hours before the appointment, in order to allow serial
      urine samples to be taken.
      Reiter’s disease is a rare complication of non-gonococcal urethritis. There
      is arthritis (mainly of knees, ankles and feet) and sometimes conjunctivitis,
      rashes and cardiac and neurological problems.
      Gonorrhoea
      Gonorrhoea may infect the urethra, cervix, rectum, pharynx or conjunc-
      tiva. Men usually have dysuria and urethral discharge, with rectal discharge
      and tenesmus in homosexuals. Women are often asymptomatic, but may
      have dysuria and vaginal discharge.
      Complications include prostatitis, epididymitis, salpingitis, Bartholin’s
      abscess; rarely septicaemia with arthritis, fever, rash (maculopapular
      initially, then pustular) and endocarditis.
                                         HEPATITIS AND LEPTOSPIROSIS              239

HepatitisND
Hepatitis A (infectious hepatitis)ND
Hepatitis A occurs throughout the world, but is particularly common in
the tropics and subtropics. It is transmitted by contamination of food or
water with infected faeces or urine. Many infections are asymptomatic.
The incubation period is 2–6 weeks (usually 84 weeks). Fever, malaise,
anorexia and nausea may last for 2–7 days before jaundice develops.
Jaundice is more common in adults than in children and is associated with
dark urine, pale stools and tender hepatomegaly.
Treatment is symptomatic, but alcohol should be avoided. Infectivity is
greatest before jaundice develops, so isolation is of little value. Arrange
follow-up by a specialist or GP. Complete recovery is usual. Hepatitis A
vaccine should be considered for close contacts (see BNF).
Hepatitis BND
Hepatitis B is transmitted by infected blood (eg shared needles in drug
abusers, tattooing, needlestick injury) and by sexual intercourse. The incuba-
tion period is 6 weeks to 6 months. The symptoms are similar to hepatitis A,
often with arthralgia and skin rashes. Most patients with hepatitis B recover
completely. A few patients develop liver failure or chronic hepatitis, with a
risk of primary liver cancer. Refer to a specialist for follow-up. Asymptomatic
carriers of hepatitis B virus are common (80.1% of the population in the UK,
but 820% in parts of Africa and Asia). Because of the high risk of infection,
all health care workers should be immunized against hepatitis B and use
‘standard precautions’ (b p.32) when handling all blood samples and
‘sharps’. The management of needlestick injury is described on b p.418.
Hepatitis C, D, and END
Hepatitis C and D are spread in the same way as hepatitis B, and may cause
hepatic failure or chronic liver disease. No immunization is available.
Hepatitis E is similar to hepatitis A, but has a high mortality in pregnancy.
Refer to a specialist for follow-up.

Leptospirosis (Weil’s disease)ND
Leptospirosis, caused by the spirochaete Leptospira interrogans and other
Leptospira species, is spread by contact with infected rat’s urine, often in
rivers, canals or sewers. The leptospires enter the body through small
breaks in the skin or via mucous membranes of the eyes or nose. About
10 days after exposure (range 2–26 days) the illness starts with fever,
severe muscle pains, headache, sore throat, nausea and vomiting.
Conjunctival reddening is common. A haemorrhagic rash, jaundice, renal
failure and pulmonary haemorrhage may occur (Weil’s disease).
Refer to an Infectious Diseases unit. Treatment is with penicillin or
doxycycline with supportive care and haemodialysis if necessary.
Prophylactic doxycycline is reasonable for people who fall into waterways
likely to be contaminated with leptospires.
240    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Herpes virus infections
      Varicella zoster
      Chickenpox results from primary infection with varicella zoster virus, which
      then remains dormant in the dorsal root ganglia. Reactivation of the virus
      causes shingles. Chickenpox is usually a mild disease of childhood. An itchy
      vesicular rash appears, most densely on the trunk and face, but decreasing
      peripherally. The lesions appear in crops and crust over in 3–4 days. Fever,
      malaise and muscle aches may occur in adults. Infectivity starts 3 days
      before the rash appears and lasts until the last lesion has crusted.
      Treat symptomatically, eg calamine lotion for itching and paracetamol for
      fever. Occasionally, antibiotics are needed for secondary bacterial skin
      infection (usually Staph. or Strep.). Pneumonia is rare and in children is
      usually staphylococcal, but in adults may be caused by chickenpox virus.
      Chickenpox may be severe in neonates and in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis
      or immune deﬁciency, who need specialist assessment and treatment with
      aciclovir and/or varicella-zoster immune globulin. Consider aciclovir also
      for adults and older adolescents (see BNF).
      Shingles often occurs in the elderly and may affect any dermatome, most
      often thoracic. The pain of shingles may cause diagnostic difﬁculty until
      the rash appears, usually after 1–4 days. Erythema is followed by vesicles
      and then crusting of lesions in a unilateral distribution over 1 dermatome
      or 2 adjacent dermatomes. Ophthalmic shingles may affect the eye via
      the long ciliary nerves: skin lesions on the side of the tip of the nose
      imply a high risk of eye involvement. Oral lesions occur in maxillary and
      mandibular shingles. Infection of the geniculate ganglion causes a facial
      palsy with lesions in the pinna of the ear and on the side of the tongue
      and hard palate (Ramsay–Hunt syndrome). In severe shingles there may be
      weakness of muscles supplied by nerves of the same spinal root.
      Antiviral treatment (aciclovir, famciclovir, or valaciclovir) d risk of post-herpetic
      pain if given early (within 72hr of start of rash). Dose: aciclovir 800mg 5 times
      daily for 7 days. In renal failure antiviral drugs may cause severe toxicity, so
      use much smaller or less frequent doses. Patients with immune deﬁciency or
      ophthalmic zoster need immediate specialist referral and antiviral treatment.
      Give analgesia. Antibiotics may be required for secondary infection.
      Herpes simplex
      Primary herpes simplex infection causes painful vesicles and ulceration of
      the mouth or genitalia (b p.238). The virus may be inoculated into skin
      by trauma (herpes gladiatorum, scrumpox) or by contamination of ﬁngers
      causing herpetic paronychia (whitlow). Infection of the cornea may cause
      dendritic ulcers (b p.543). Herpes simplex meningitis and encephalitisND
      are uncommon, but may be fatal, especially in immunodeﬁcient patients.
      The herpes simplex virus persists in sensory ganglia and may be reactivated
      by stimuli such as sun, cold, trauma, or viral infections. Recurrence of cold
      sores of the lips is often preceded by tingling: aciclovir cream or tablets
      may prevent the development of vesicles. Secondary bacterial infection
      may require antibiotics. Do not incise a suspected whitlow. Cover it with
      a dressing and advise care to avoid spreading infection to the lips or eyes.
                INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS (GLANDULAR FEVER)                     241

Infectious mononucleosis
(glandular fever)
Infection with the Epstein–Barr virus is common in children and young
adults and is spread by saliva or droplets. Infection often occurs without
clinical disease. In glandular fever there is malaise, fever, a sore throat,
and cervical lymphadenopathy. The throat may be very red and in 25% of
cases there is also infection with a B-haemolytic streptococcus. In severe
cases there is marked oedema of the throat with tonsillar swelling and a
membranous exudate (‘anginose’ infectious mononucleosis) with difﬁculty
in swallowing and breathing. A rash is uncommon unless ampicillin or
amoxicillin are given, causing a widespread erythematous maculopapular
rash (which does not signify allergy to penicillins in general).
Complications of infectious mononucleosis include respiratory obstruction,
ruptured spleen (spontaneously or after minor trauma), thrombocytopenia,
jaundice, meningitis, encephalitis, facial palsy, and acute polyneuritis
(occasionally causing respiratory failure).
Investigations FBC and blood ﬁlm (for atypical lymphocytes), Monospot
test or Paul–Bunnell test (which may be –ve initially).
Differential diagnosis includes cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmosis.
Treatment is unnecessary in most patients. Severe or complicated cases
need specialist assessment and follow-up. In anginose infectious mono-
nucleosis, a short course of high dose oral steroids gives rapid relief of
symptoms (prednisolone 80mg on day 1; 15mg tds on days 2–3; 10mg tds
on days 4–5; 5mg tds on days 6–7). Steroids are also helpful in patients
with neurological complications. Concurrent B-haemolytic streptococcal
infection requires erythromycin (500mg qds), which would also treat the
rare unrecognized case of diphtheria.
242    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
      First reports of acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) involved
      homosexuals in the USA in 1981. HIV (previously called HTLV-III, LAV, or
      ARV) was identiﬁed as the causative agent in Paris in 1983.
      Structure and pathogenesis
      HIV is an RNA retrovirus. Retroviruses are characterized by having the
      enzyme reverse transcriptase. This allows viral RNA to be transcribed
      (copied) into DNA and incorporated into host cells, which then make a
      new virus. This mechanism has proved difﬁcult to overcome: no ‘cure’ or
      ‘vaccine’ is yet available.
      Glycoproteins on the surface of HIV bind to speciﬁc receptors on target
      cells. The cellular receptor for HIV is the CD4 molecule. CD4 receptors
      are found on a variety of cells, particularly helper/inducer T lymphocytes
      (‘CD4 cells’), but also monocytes and macrophages. CD4 cells normally
      play a crucial role in co-ordinating the immune response: as HIV infection
      progresses and CD4 cell counts d, the patient develops profound cellular
      immunodeﬁciency. Although other complex mechanisms are also involved,
      CD4 cell counts provide a useful index of disease stage and progress.
      Transmission
      HIV has been found in many body ﬂuids, but is mostly transmitted via
      blood, semen, cervical secretions and, perhaps, breast milk. It may be
      acquired by:
      • Sexual intercourse (vaginal or anal), with i risk of transmission where
        individuals already have a genital mucosal breach (eg co-existent STD).
      • Risk of transmission from HIV +ve pregnant mother to baby is 815%.
      • Transfusion of unscreened blood/blood products (screening started in
        1985 in the UK).
      • Contaminated needles shared amongst IV drug abusers. Needlestick
        injuries from an HIV positive source carry a risk of 80.3%.
      Diagnosis and HIV testing
      Antibodies to HIV provide evidence of infection and form the basis of
      current blood tests, but these antibodies may not appear until 3 months
      after exposure. HIV testing is not appropriate in the ED, but reserved
      for clinics where informed consent and counselling are available. Refer
      patients requesting HIV tests to local Infectious Diseases/GU clinics or
      advisory organizations, eg Terrence Higgins Trust (tel. 0808 802 1221), or
      the NHS Sexual Health Helpline (24hr freephone 0800 567 123).
      Natural history of HIV infection
      HIV infection progresses through phases, which form the basis of the
      two commonly used classiﬁcation systems (World Health Organization
      (WHO) and CDC systems).
      Acute infection is often sub-clinical, but 2–6 weeks after exposure there
      may be a non-speciﬁc febrile illness with lethargy, myalgia, sore throat,
      lymphadenopathy, and often a maculopapular rash on the face and trunk.
      This illness usually resolves after 1–2 weeks but sometimes persists for
      longer. A long asymptomatic period (810 years) follows the initial illness.
                             HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV)             243

Some patients develop persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL),
with lymphadenopathy (>1cm) at two non-inguinal sites for 3 months.
Patients become symptomatic as their immunity d, developing unusual
infections and tumours. Many are ‘AIDS-deﬁning diseases’ (see below).
The label ‘AIDS’ has signiﬁcant psychological connotations. Most patients
with AIDS survive >2 years.
Anti-retroviral drugs (AZT and other drugs) delay the onset of AIDS in
asymptomatic patients and i length of survival. ‘HAART’ (highly active
antiretroviral therapy) is a regime combining 3 or more anti-HIV drugs.
Initial presentation of HIV to the emergency department
Many HIV +ve patients attending the ED are aware of their HIV status.
Some patients, however, present with HIV-related illness, without
knowing (or admitting) that they are HIV +ve. Presentation of any of the
diseases listed below should arouse particular suspicion.
Centers for Disease Control classiﬁcation of HIV infection
Group I     Acute infection
Group II    Asymptomatic
Group III   Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy
Group IV    Symptomatic infection with subgroups:
            A—constitutional disease (fever, diarrhoea, weight loss)
            B—neurological disease (dementia, peripheral neuropathy)
            C—secondary infectious diseases
            D—secondary cancers (lymphomas, Kaposi’s sarcoma)
            E—other conditions
Some AIDS-deﬁning diseases in HIV +ve patients
• Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (previously called P. carinii).
• Kaposi’s sarcoma.
• Tracheobronchial or oesophageal candidiasis.
• Cerebral toxoplasmosis.
• Pulmonary TB.
• Cytomegalovirus retinitis.
• Cerebral lymphoma.
• Recurrent Salmonella septicaemia.
• Disseminated histoplasmosis.
• Invasive cervical carcinoma.
• Disseminated coccidioidomycosis.
• Cryptococcosis.
• Cryptosporidiosis.
• Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy.
• Oesophageal or bronchial herpes simplex.
CD4 counts and AIDS
CD4 counts provide an indication of disease progession: many HIV
+ve patients know what their last count was. In the USA, CD4 counts
<200/mm3 may also be used to deﬁne AIDS.
244    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Presentation of HIV +ve patients
      Many patients with symptomatic HIV infection bypass the ED and liaise
      directly with the specialist unit caring for them. Assessment of HIV +ve
      patients is difﬁcult in the ED, where advanced infections may present with
      relatively few signs and little past history is available. Similarly, interpreta-
      tion of investigations is difﬁcult without knowledge of previous results.
      It is therefore reasonable to have a low threshold for specialist referral.
      HIV +ve patients may present with a variety of complications:
      Respiratory problems
      As CD4 counts d, pneumonia due to Pneumocystis jiroveci (previously
      Pneumocystis cariniii) becomes more likely and it is a common indicator
      diagnosis of AIDS. A non-productive cough occurs with dyspnoea and
      fever. CXR may show bilateral interstitial mid-zone shadowing, but may
      be normal. Obtain blood and sputum cultures, rehydrate with IV ﬂuids
      as necessary and refer urgently for IV co-trimoxazole or pentamidine ±
      steroids. Occasionally, Pneumocystis infection may present with fulminant
      respiratory failure needing emergency tracheal intubation and IPPV. Other
      common infections include Aspergillus, Cryptococcus and TB. Injecting drug
      users are at increased risk of bacterial infection, especially Haemophilus
      inﬂuenzae and Strep. pneumoniae.
      Neurological problems
      Cryptococcus neoformans meningitis may present with headache, fever and
      sometimes d conscious level. Neck stiffness and photophobia are rare.
      Obtain a CT scan to exclude space-occupying lesions before LP and CSF
      examination. Cerebral toxoplasmosis may present similarly, often with
      focal signs or ﬁts. Neurological problems may also be caused by cerebral
      lymphoma, progressive leucoencephalopathy (focal deﬁcits secondary to
      papovaviruses), CMV encephalitis (retinopathy is usually present—see
      below) and HIV-associated delirium or dementia.
      Eye problems
      The most signiﬁcant eye problem is Cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis,
      occurring in 15% of patients. This presents with blurred vision, blind spots,
      ‘ﬂoaters’ or ﬂashing lights, and d VA. Characteristic retinal changes are
      irregular yellow-white lesions and perivascular haemorrhages that have
      been called ‘pizza pie’. Retinal detachment may occur. Refer urgently for
      ophthalmological assessment and treatment with ganciclovir or foscarnet.
      Mucocutaneous problems
      Oral candidiasis, seborrhoeic dermatitis, and oral hairy leukoplakia (white
      ridges on lateral border of tongue) are often seen before AIDS develops.
      As immunity d, patients may develop herpes simplex, herpes zoster and
      molluscum contagiosum. Gum bleeding and dental problems are common:
      the former may be due to thrombocytopenia. Kaposi’s sarcoma is seen in
      skin and mucous membranes, particularly in homosexuals with AIDS. It is
      rarely life-threatening, but requires specialist evaluation and treatment.
                                   PRESENTATION OF HIV +VE PATIENTS                  245

Gastrointestinal problems
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and weight loss are common complaints
and can be due to drug therapy. Dysphagia may result from oesopha-
geal candidiasis, herpes simplex, CMV, or Kaposi’s sarcoma, all of which
require specialist investigation and treatment.
CMV colitis can cause a serious illness, characterized by abdominal pain,
diarrhoea and fever. Obtain plain X-rays if the recognized complication
of toxic dilatation is suspected. Other frequently implicated infective
causes of diarrhoea include cryptosporidium, Giardia, microsporidium and
Salmonella. Send stool specimens (including for Clostridium difﬁcile) and
treat severe diarrhoea by IV rehydration and correction of electrolyte
imbalance before referral.
Hepatitis viruses are likely to complicate the picture in injecting drug
users, many of whom are infected with hepatitis B and C.
Drug reactions and side effects
Many patients will present with symptoms due to drug therapy. This may
not be initially apparent: the safest approach is to exclude tumours and
opportunistic infection ﬁrst.
HIV and emergency department staff
ED staff are often concerned about the possibility of acquiring HIV
from patients. The need to perform invasive emergency procedures on
‘high risk’ patients makes these concerns understandable. Additionally,
apparently ‘low risk’ patients may also pose a threat. Therefore treat
every patient as if he is ‘high risk’. The risk to ED staff is largely in the form
of needlestick injury (although the risk of acquiring HIV following needle-
stick from a HIV +ve source can be d by post-exposure prophylaxis—see
b p.418). Safe practice is reﬂected in the recommended standard pre-
cautions (see b p.32)—follow these in all patients. Pregnant staff should
not treat patients with AIDS (because of concern about CMV and herpes
simplex virus).
Handling HIV +ve patients
Despite vigorous attempts to educate the general public, HIV and AIDS
remain taboo subjects amongst many in society. It is imperative to treat
all patients, including those who are HIV +ve, with sensitivity and compas-
sion. Touching and shaking hands with HIV +ve patients is perfectly safe,
and may help to reassure them that the discrimination and irrational treat-
ment they may have received outside hospital does not extend into the
ED. In view of prevailing attitudes towards HIV, patient conﬁdentiality is of
the utmost importance. Remember that family and friends accompanying
the patient may be unaware of his HIV status.
HIV +ve staff
The risk to patients from ED staff infected with HIV is minimal, but remains
a theoretical possibility. Staff who believe that they may be HIV +ve must
obtain and follow occupational health advice.
Needlestick injury: See b p.418.
246    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Imported infectious diseases
      Patients may present to the ED with infectious diseases acquired abroad.
      It is essential to ask where a patient has been, especially in the 6 weeks
      before the onset of symptoms. The most common imported diseases
      are bowel infections causing diarrhoea (b p.226). Less common, but
      very important diseases include malaria (b p.247), typhoid (b p.248),
      Legionnaires’ disease (b p.110) and hepatitis (b p.239). Rabies (b
      p.249) and viral haemorrhagic fevers, such as Lassa fever (b p.250) are
      very rare in the UK.
      Occasionally, tropical diseases are acquired in Britain from bites by
      infected insects carried by plane (eg ‘airport malaria’).
      Advice about tropical diseases is available from departments of Infectious
      Diseases or Tropical Medicine:
      • Birmingham (Heartlands Hospital). www.heartofengland.nhs.uk Telephone
        0121 424 2000.
      • Liverpool (School of Tropical Medicine). www.liv.ac.uk/lstm Telephone
        0151 705 3100.
      • London (Hospital for Tropical Diseases) www.thehtd.org/Emergencies.
        aspx Telephone 0845 155 5000.
      • Oxford (Churchill Hospital) Telephone 01865 741 841.
      • Glasgow (Brownlee Centre for Infectious and Communicable Diseases,
        Gartnavel General Hospital) Telephone 0141 211 3000.
      • A public access website provided by the NHS which gives information
        for people travelling abroad from the UK is www.ﬁtfortravel.scot.
        nhs.uk
      Pyrexia of unknown origin in travellers
      Think of and check for malaria (b p.247) in any febrile patient who has
      been in a malarious area. Consider Lassa fever (b p.250) in someone who
      has been in West Africa in the previous 3 weeks. Typhoid (b p.248) often
      presents as a septicaemic illness with constipation, rather than diarrhoea.
      TB (b p.232) and brucellosis may cause fever and sweating at night.
      Investigations (warn lab of possible risks)
      FBC, thick and thin blood ﬁlms for malaria, U&E, blood glucose, blood
      culture, urine stick testing, microscopy and culture, CXR.
      Further investigations may include LFTs and viral titres.
      Management Barrier nurse in a cubicle (use a negative pressure room if
      available). Wear gown, gloves, goggles and mask. Record vaccination and
      prophylaxis history, with countries and areas visited, and dates of travel
      and onset of symptoms. Look particularly for confusion, dehydration,
      jaundice, rashes, chest signs, liver and spleen enlargement and tenderness,
      lymphadenopathy, neck stiffness, photophobia. Seek expert advice at once
      if the patient is very ill or there is concern about typhoid or Lassa fever or
      other viral haemorrhagic fevers. Refer to an Infectious Diseases specialist.
                                                                                 MALARIA ND    247

MalariaND
Malaria is very common in the tropics and subtropical regions, and is a
parasitic infection transmitted by mosquitoes. The ﬁve species which
cause malaria in humans are Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae,
P. ovale, and P. knowlesi. Falciparum (‘malignant tertian’) malaria is the
most important, since it may be rapidly fatal and drug-resistant strains are
common. Serious complications are unusual in the other types of malaria,
but they may cause febrile convulsions in children.
In the UK malaria occurs in travellers from malarious areas, especially
P. vivax from the Indian subcontinent and P. falciparum from Africa, South-
East Asia, and Central and South America. Malaria often develops despite
antimalarial tablets, because of drug resistance or incorrect dosage. Check
for malaria in any febrile illness within 2 months of visiting a malarious
area. Common misdiagnoses are inﬂuenza and viral hepatitis.
Clinical features
The incubation period is usually 7–14 days for P. falciparum and 12–40 days for
other types of malaria, but occasionally it is much longer (>1 year), especially
in P. malariae and P. vivax infections. There is malaise, fatigue, fever and head-
ache followed by paroxysms lasting 8–12hr of rigors, vomiting and then severe
sweating. The fever may be periodic (classically 48hr in P. ovale or P. vivax,
and 72hr in P. malariae). Haemolytic anaemia, jaundice and splenomegaly may
occur, but lymphadenopathy is not a feature. P. falciparum may cause cerebral
malaria with coma, ﬁts and focal neurological signs. Diarrhoea, cardiac failure,
pulmonary oedema and shock may occur. Deterioration can be rapid.
Investigations
Consider Lassa fever (b p.250) in recent visitors to West Africa. In any
ill patient who has been in a malarious area send blood for thin and thick
ﬁlm examination for malaria. Repeated blood ﬁlms may be needed. Also
arrange FBC (since malaria may cause anaemia, thrombocytopenia and
neutropenia), blood glucose (hypoglycaemia may be severe), U&E (renal
failure is possible), and test the urine for blood (‘black water fever’).
Treatment of falciparum malaria1
Careful monitoring is needed ± ICU. Obtain expert advice from a tropical
disease specialist (b p.246), especially if the patient is severely ill or has
come from south-east Asia, where there is widespread drug resistance.
Give quinine, orally or IV depending on the severity of illness: oral quinine
sulphate 600mg (adult) or 10mg/kg (child) every 8hr for 7 days, followed
by doxycycline 200mg od for 7 days, clindamycin 450mg tds for 5 days or
Fansidar® 3 tablets. Alternative oral drugs are Malarone® (proguanil with
atovaquone) or Riamet® (artemether with lumefantrine): for details see
BNF. For algorithm1 see www.britishinfectionsociety.org.
Treatment of benign malarias (P. vivax, ovale, malariae)1
The usual treatment is chloroquine (see BNF). A course of primaquine is
also needed to prevent relapse in vivax and ovale infections, but glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase levels should be checked before primaquine
is used, since it may cause haemolysis in G6PD deﬁcient patients. In the
UK refer to an Infectious Diseases unit for treatment and follow-up.
1 Lalloo DG et al. (2007) UK malaria treatment guidelines. Journal of Infection 54: 111–121.
248    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      TyphoidND and paratyphoidND
      (enteric fever)
      These fevers, caused by Salmonella typhi and S. paratyphi A, B, or C, occur
      throughout the world, especially where hygiene is inadequate. They
      are spread by contamination of food or water by urine or faeces from
      a patient or an asymptomatic carrier. Typhoid may occur despite immu-
      nization. Typhoid and malaria are the ﬁrst diseases to consider if fever
      develops soon after a visit to the tropics. The incubation period is usually
      7–14 days, but may range from 3–60 days.
      Initial symptoms
      Headache, fever, and a dry cough, with abdominal discomfort and
      anorexia. Constipation is common, but diarrhoea may occur, especially in
      children. Confusion and hallucinations may develop.
      Physical examination
      This may be normal except for fever. There may be a relative brady-
      cardia (ie less than the usual 15 beats/min i in pulse rate per °C of
      fever). Splenomegaly and abdominal tenderness occur, but there is no
      lymphadenopathy. ‘Rose spots’ are pink macular spots on the lower chest
      or upper abdomen which blanch on pressure. There may be signs of
      pneumonia or dehydration. Intestinal perforation or haemorrhage occur
      occasionally.
      Investigations
      FBC (mild anaemia is common, WBC usually normal), blood ﬁlms for
      malaria, U&E, LFTs, blood cultures, CXR (for signs of TB or pneumonia).
      Treatment
      Isolate and barrier nurse. Admit suspected cases to an Infectious Diseases
      unit and notify the local consultant in Communicable Disease Control.
      The usual drug treatment is with ciproﬂoxacin or cefotaxime but other
      antibiotics may be needed for drug-resistant infections.

      Dengue
      Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection which is common in southern
      Asia, the western Paciﬁc, central Africa and central and south America.
      Most infections are asymptomatic. Symptoms start after an incubation
      period of 4–7 days with fever, malaise, nausea and vomiting, headache,
      severe muscle and bone pains (‘break bone fever’). Some patients have
      a transient macular rash, petechiae, lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly,
      d WCC and platelets and i liver enzymes.
      Most patients recover after 3–7 days with symptomatic treatment. A few
      develop dengue shock syndrome (DSS) with hypotension, pleural
      effusions, ascites, d plasma protein and bleeding problems. Abdominal
      pain may be severe. Treatment is supportive, with careful ﬂuid balance
      management and IV ﬂuids in DSS. With expert care most patients with
      severe dengue eventually make a full recovery.
                                                                RABIES ND      249

PoliomyelitisND
Paralytic poliomyelitis is rare in developed countries where vaccination
is routine. Fever is followed by signs of meningitis, pain and spasm in limb
muscles. Respiratory failure may be fatal.
Resuscitate and ventilate if necessary and refer to ICU.
The differential diagnosis includes Guillain–Barré syndrome (b p.142) and
organophosphate poisoning (b p.206).

RabiesND
Rabies is a viral infection of mammals that occurs in most parts of the
world, including much of the Arctic, as well as tropical and temperate
regions. At present it is not endemic in the UK, Norway, Sweden, Iceland,
Australasia, or Japan. Human and animal rabies is most common in the
Indian subcontinent, China, Thailand, the Philippines, and parts of South
America. Most human infections result from dog bites, but rabies can be
transmitted by many other domesticated or wild animals, such as cats and
foxes. Rabies virus in an animal’s saliva may cause infection by contamina-
tion of a bite or scratch or by absorption through mucous membranes of
the eye, mouth or nose. Rarely, infection occurs from inhalation of the
virus in bat-infested caves.
Prevention of rabies after a bite is described on b p.415.
Advice about post-exposure treatment and suspected cases of rabies is
available in the UK from the Health Protection Agency. For details see
www.hpa.org.uk/Topics/InfectiousDiseases/InfectionsAZ/Rabies
Clinical features
The incubation period of rabies is usually 3–12 weeks, but can vary from a
few days to >2 years.
The ﬁrst symptoms are itching, tingling or pain at the site of the bite
wound. Headache, fever, and malaise occur, with spreading paralysis
and episodes of confusion, hallucination and agitation. Hydrophobia is
characteristic: attempts at drinking cause spasm of muscles involved in
breathing and swallowing and also profound terror. In 820% of cases
there is ‘dumb rabies’ with increasing paralysis but no episodes of spasm
or hyperactivity. Rabies is almost always fatal, even with ICU treatment.
Management
If rabies is suspected, barrier nurse the patient in a quiet room with the
minimum of staff, who must wear gowns, gloves, eye protection and
masks. Obtain advice immediately from a specialist in Infectious Diseases.
Anticipate press enquiries. Record the names of all staff involved, so that
they can be offered rabies immunization.
250    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Viral haemorrhagic feversND
      Lassa fever
      Lassa fever occurs in many rural parts of West Africa. It is a viral infection
      acquired from infected blood or secretions, transmitted by inadvertent
      innoculation (eg needlestick injuries) or contamination of mucous mem-
      branes or broken skin. In Africa it is transmitted by multimammate rats.
      The incubation period is up to 3 weeks. There is a high mortality.
      Early symptoms are non-speciﬁc with fever, malaise, headache, sore
      throat, retrosternal chest pain and backache. Periorbital oedema, swelling
      of the neck and conjunctival injection are common. Suspect Lassa fever
      in any pyrexial patient who has been in rural West Africa (south of the
      Sahara) in the previous 3 weeks. However, malaria and typhoid are much
      more common and need urgent diagnosis and treatment.
      Management If Lassa fever is possible, barrier nurse the patient in a
      cubicle by staff wearing gloves, gowns, goggles and masks. Take special
      care to avoid needlestick injuries, which may cause fatal infection. Before
      taking any blood samples, discuss the case with a tropical diseases
      specialist and the local consultant in Communicable Disease Control.
      Start treatment immediately for falciparum malaria (b p.247). Warn the
      laboratory about Lassa fever and send blood for examination for malaria.
      The patient will be admitted to an isolation bed, possibly in a high security
      Infectious Diseases unit.
      Ebola fever and Marburg fever
      These are viral haemorrhagic fevers which occur in West and Central
      Africa (Zaire, Uganda, Kenya and Sudan), and have similar clinical features
      and a high mortality. Transmission is usually by infected blood, but the
      viruses may be acquired from monkeys or apes. The incubation period is
      usually 4–10 days. Illness starts suddenly with severe headache, high fever,
      and generalized pains, especially in the back, followed by severe diarrhoea,
      abdominal pain, dry throat, a maculopapular rash, conjunctivitis, and
      gastrointestinal bleeding. Isolate and treat as for suspected Lassa fever.
      Other viral haemorrhagic fevers
      Diseases with similar features (plus in some cases jaundice) include dengue
      (see b p.248), Crimean-Congo fever (central Africa, parts of Eastern
      Europe, and Asia) and yellow fever (Africa and South America). The initial
      management is the same as for Lassa fever.
                             SEVERE ACUTE RESPIRATORY SYNDROME                  251

Severe acute respiratory syndrome
Background
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is a viral respiratory illness
caused by a coronavirus. SARS was ﬁrst recognized in March 2003, but
probably originated in November 2002 in the Guangdong province of
China, where the virus has been found in wild animals. SARS spread to
several countries, causing deaths in south-east Asia and Canada in March to
May 2003. Few cases have occurred since then. No cases are known at the
time of writing, but there is concern that SARS may re-emerge from China.
Spread
SARS is spread by respiratory droplets produced when an infected person
coughs, sneezes, or uses a nebulizer. The virus can also spread when
someone touches an object contaminated by infectious droplets and then
touches his/her mouth, nose, or eyes.
Features
The incubation period of SARS is usually 2–7 days, but may be up to 10 days.
The illness starts with fever (>38°C), usually associated with rigors, head-
ache, muscle pains and malaise. Diarrhoea may occur. Some patients have
mild respiratory symptoms initially. A dry cough develops after 2–7 days,
with increasing breathlessness from hypoxia caused by pneumonia. Consider
the possibility of SARS in a patient with these symptoms who, within 10 days
of the onset of illness, has visited an area where SARS may occur (especially
China) or worked in a laboratory holding SARS virus samples.
CXR may be normal or may show patchy inﬁltrates, and later areas of
consolidation. WCC is usually normal or d initially (lymphopenia).
Management
If SARS is suspected, get expert help (ED consultant, Infectious Diseases
specialist, and infection control staff) and isolate the patient (if possible
in a negative pressure room). Ensure that the minimum number of staff
have contact with the patient. Staff who do have contact must wear masks
or respirators (of FFP3 standard), goggles, gowns and gloves, with strict
handwashing and careful disposal of all items. Provide the patient with an
N95 mask or a surgical mask. Record SpO2 and give O2 if necessary, but
avoid ﬂow rates of >6L/min, to minimize virus aerolization. If bronchodila-
tors are needed, use a spacer inhaler rather than a nebulizer. Maintain a
list of all contacts. Expect press enquiries.
An expert will help to assess to decide about admission. Those admitted
should ideally be placed in a negative pressure isolation room with full
infection control measures. Treat as for community-acquired pneumonia
(b p.110).
Further information about SARS is available from:
• www.hpa.org.uk/Topics/InfectiousDiseases/InfectionsAZ/
  SevereAcuteRespiratorySyndrome/ (Health Protection Agency, UK).
• www.who.int/csr/sars/en/index.html (World Health Organization).
252    CHAPTER 5 Infectious diseases

      Inﬂuenza pandemics, avian ﬂu, and
      swine ﬂu
      Background
      Inﬂuenza is common in the UK and many other countries, particularly
      during winter. Most people are ill for only a few days with fever, muscle
      aches, coughing and nausea, but there are some deaths, especially in
      elderly people.
      Pandemic inﬂuenza occurs when a new subtype of inﬂuenza A emerges,
      which can spread easily from person to person and which is different
      from previous strains (so there is no pre-existing immunity). Inﬂuenza
      pandemics occurred in 1918–1919 (with 40–50 million deaths worldwide,
      including many children and young adults), and also in 1957 and 1968.
      Another pandemic could develop at any time. There was concern about
      inﬂuenza A subtype H5N1, which infected poultry in Hong Kong in
      1997 and 2003 and spread to birds across south-east Asia, with carriage
      by migrating birds across Asia and to Europe and Africa. This avian ﬂu
      infected many millions of birds and some people in south-east Asia
      and Turkey who had been in close contact with infected chickens. The
      mortality in these cases was high. In 2009 inﬂuenza A subtype H1N1
      caused a pandemic of swine ﬂu which started in Mexico and spread to
      many other countries. Most patients with swine ﬂu had only mild illness
      but a minority developed severe infection, and some died.
      Human-to-human spread of H1N1 or H5N1 ﬂu is rare, at the time of
      writing, but another pandemic could develop if the virus mutates again.
      Spread
      Like SARS (see b p.251) ﬂu is spread by droplets coughed or sneezed
      into the air, or by direct contact with hands contaminated with the virus.
      Features
      Consider the possibility of avian ﬂu or swine ﬂu in a patient with fever
      t38°C and cough or breathlessness, who in the last 7 days has been in
      an area affected by H1N1 or H5N1 inﬂuenza. Laboratory staff and health
      care workers in contact with cases of severe unexplained respiratory
      illness could also be at risk.
      Management
      Isolate the patient and treat with precautions against transmission of
      the virus, as for SARS (b p.251). Antiviral treatment with oseltamivir or
      zanimivir may be considered, depending on current guidelines.
      Further information
      Clinical guidelines about the assessment of suspected cases and the man-
      agement of inﬂuenza patients will be updated as the situation changes and
      if another pandemic develops. Information is available from the UK Health
      Protection Agency: www.hpa.org.uk/infections/topics_az/inﬂuenza/pandemic
 Chapter 6                                     253

Environmental
emergencies

Hypothermia                              254
Frostbite and non-freezing cold injury   257
Drowning and near drowning               258
Diving emergencies                       260
Heat illness                             264
Electrical injuries                      266
Radiation incidents                      268
254    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Hypothermia: presentation
      Deﬁnitions
      Hypothermia exists when the core temperature (T°)<35°C.
      Hypothermia may be classiﬁed as follows:

       Mild hypothermia                                  = 32–35°C
       Moderate hypothermia                              = 30–32°C
       Severe hypothermia                                = <30°C

      Background
      Infants and the elderly are at particular risk. In young adults hypothermia
      is usually due to environmental exposure (eg hill-walking or cold water
      immersion), or to immobility and impaired conscious level from alcohol or
      drugs. In the elderly, it is more often a prolonged state of multifactorial origin:
      common precipitants include unsatisfactory housing, poverty, immobility,
      lack of cold awareness (autonomic neuropathy, dementia), drugs (sedatives,
      antidepressants), alcohol, acute confusion, hypothyroidism and infections.
      Clinical features
      Severe hypothermia may mimic death. Wide variations occur, but as
      core T° d, cerebral and cardiovascular function deteriorate. At 32–35°C,
      apathy, amnesia, ataxia and dysarthria are common. At <32°C, conscious-
      ness falls progressively, leading to coma, d BP, arrhythmias (check pulse
      for at least 1min before diagnosing cardiac arrest), respiratory depression
      and muscular rigidity. Shivering is an unreliable sign. VF may occur sponta-
      neously when T° falls <28°C and may be provoked by limb movement or
      invasive procedures (especially in the presence of hypoxia).
      Diagnosis
      Check tympanic T° (or rectal T° with an electronic probe or low-reading
      thermometer). Tympanic and rectal T° may lag behind core (cardiac) T°
      during rewarming. Oesophageal T° reﬂects core levels more accurately,
      but requires special equipment.
      Investigations
      • U&E.
      • FBC, toxicology and clotting screens. Note that hypothermia can cause
        or aggravate coagulation disturbances.
      • Blood glucose (BMG reading may be falsely d).
      • Amylase (i levels common, but do not necessarily imply pancreatitis).
      • Blood cultures.
      • ABG.
      • ECG: look for prolongation of elements in the PQRST complex, J-waves,
        and arrhythmias (AF and bradycardias are the commonest) (Fig. 6.1).
      • CXR: look for pneumonia, aspiration, left ventricular failure. Other
        X-rays may be required after rewarming (eg for suspected fractured
        neck of femur).
      • CT scan may be indicated if head injury or stroke is suspected.
                                            HYPOTHERMIA: PRESENTATION      255

         I                 avR                v1                 v4

         II                avL                v2                 v5

         III               avF                 v3                v6

             RHYTHM STRIP II

Fig. 6.1 ECG in hypothermia.
Notes on this ECG
• Rhythm disturbance: atrial ﬁbrillation with slow ventricular response.
• Prolongation of QRS.
• Delayed repolarization ‘J-waves’ (arrowed).
• ST–T wave abnormalities.
256    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Hypothermia: management
      Principles
      • Treat in a warm room (>21°C).
      • Handle the patient gently (to d risk of VF).
      • Remove wet clothes and dry the skin.
      • Monitor ECG.
      • Give warmed, humidiﬁed O2 by mask.
      • Intubation, if needed, should be preceded by oxygenation and must be
        performed expertly to avoid precipitating arrhythmias.
      • Secure IV access. IV ﬂuid is rarely required unless there is loss of volume
        from another cause. If BP d during rewarming, give 300–500mL of
        warmed 0.9% saline or colloid. In unstable patients, consider CVP and
        urinary catheter. Warm IV ﬂuid administration is an inefﬁcient rewarming
        method and runs the risks of ﬂuid overload and precipitating arrhythmias.
      • Correct hypoglycaemia if present with IV glucose.
      • If CPR is required, give chest compressions and ventilations at standard
        rates.
      • In hypothermic cardiac arrest, the heart may be unresponsive to
        deﬁbrillation, pacing and drug therapy. Drug metabolism is d and
        unpredictable: avoid drugs until core T°>30°C.
      • Deﬁbrillation is appropriate at normal energy levels if VF/VT occurs.
        If 3 shocks are unsuccessful, defer further shocks until core T°>30°C.
      Rewarming methods
      The choice depends upon the severity and duration of the condition, available
      facilities and the individual patient:
      Passive rewarming
      Easy, non-invasive, and suitable for mild cases (T°>32°C). d evaporative
      and conductive losses by wrapping in warm blankets (remember to
      cover the back and sides of the head) ± polythene sheets. Avoid space
      blankets which are noisy and have no advantages over polythene sheets.
      Endogenous metabolism and shivering usually generate enough heat to
      allow spontaneous rewarming. Aim for a rate of 0.5–2°C/hr, but do not
      rewarm the elderly with prolonged hypothermia too rapidly (>0.6°C/hr),
      as hypotension or cerebral/pulmonary oedema may develop.
      Active rewarming
      A water bath at 841°C is rapid and useful for immersion hypothermia,
      but cannot be used in injured patients or if CPR is required. Airway care,
      ventilation and monitoring are difﬁcult, and hazards include core T° after-
      drop and BP d due to peripheral vasodilation. Hot water bottles and heat
      pads are less efﬁcient and can cause burns. A hot air blanket is more con-
      venient than a water bath, provides some heat and reduces heat loss.
      Core rewarming
      • Airway warming with heated (40–45°C) humidiﬁed O2 provides some
         additional heat and reduces heat loss. It can be combined with other
         rewarming methods. It may reduce the risk of cardiac arrhythmias.
      • Peritoneal lavage is simple, and quick to set up. Saline at 45°C is run in
         via a DPL catheter (b p.347), left for 10–20mins and replaced with a
         fresh warm supply. The ﬂuid directly heats the liver and retroperitoneal
         structures including blood in the IVC.
      Extracorporeal rewarming with cardiopulmonary bypass maintains brain
      and organ perfusion and, if available, is the method of choice in patients
      with severe hypothermia or cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary bypass can
      result in rapid rewarming with core T° i at 1−2°C/5min.
                             FROSTBITE AND NON-FREEZING COLD INJURY                                 257

Frostbite and non-freezing cold injury
Frostbite1, 2
Frostbite occurs when tissues freeze at sub-zero temperatures.
Predisposing factors include inadequate clothing/footwear, hypothermia,
exhaustion, alcohol (which impairs judgement), drugs (eg beta-blockers),
peripheral vascular disease, smoking, and previous cold injury. Frostbite
usually involves extremities, especially ﬁngers, toes, nose and ears.
Frostnip may precede frostbite. The skin of the nose, face or ﬁngers goes
white and numb, but recovers rapidly on protection from the cold, with
transient paraesthesiae but no tissue loss and no permanent damage.
Superﬁcial frostbite involves skin and subcutaneous tissues. The frozen
area is numb, and looks white and waxy. Tissues feel ﬁrm or hard but are
still pliable. Rewarming is painful. Oedematous hyperaemic skin becomes
mottled or purple, with serum-ﬁlled blisters. A hard black eschar forms,
and after 83 weeks this separates, revealing sensitive red shiny skin.
Deep frostbite involves muscles, nerves and sometimes bone, as well as
skin and superﬁcial tissues. The damaged area is hard and remains grey
or white after rewarming. Blood-ﬁlled blisters develop. The dead tissue
mummiﬁes and then separates after several weeks or months.
Treatment of frostbite varies with the situation and facilities. Only
frostnip should be treated in the ﬁeld. Frostbitten tissues need rewarming
as soon as possible but further damage must be avoided: it is better to
walk out on frozen feet than on partially thawed feet. Treat hypothermia
before frostbite. Rewarm frostbitten limbs in water at 37−39°C until skin
circulation returns (usually 830min). Give analgesia and ibuprofen (which
inhibits prostaglandins). After rewarming let the area dry in warm air (do
not towel dry). Elevate the limb. Expose the area, with a bed cradle to
avoid pressure of bedclothes. Clean the area daily in a whirlpool bath
and encourage movement. If necessary split eschar to relieve stiffness,
but avoid surgical debridement and amputations and allow the eschar to
separate spontaneously: premature surgery causes avoidable tissue loss.
Expert advice is helpful in severe frostbite: the British Mountaineerng
Council (www.thebmc.co.uk) has a frostbite advice service. Bone scans or
MRI/MRA may help to deﬁne deep tissue injury. In severe frostbite early
thrombolysis with tPA may reduce the risk of eventual amputations.
Non-freezing cold injury1, 2
Trench foot (immersion foot) is caused by prolonged immersion in cold
water or wet boots at temperatures just above freezing. Vasoconstriction
causes tissue ischaemia and nerve damage. The feet are initially cold,
numb and pale or mottled. On rewarming they become red, swollen and
very painful. Blisters may develop.
Treatment: keep the feet clean, warm and dry, elevated to reduce oedema.
Outcome: most patients recover fully, but some have continued pain,
paraesthesiae and sensitivity to cold.
1 State of Alaska Cold Injury Guidelines. www.chems.alaska.gov/EMS/documents/AKColdInj2005.
  pdf
2 Imray C et al. (2009) Cold damage to the extremities: frostbite and non-freezing cold injuries.
  Postgraduate Medical Journal 85: 481–8.
258    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Drowning and near drowning
      Deﬁnitions
      Drowning is death by suffocation from submersion in any liquid. Drowning
      is a common cause of death in young people. 40% of drownings occur in
      children aged <4 years.
      Near drowning is survival (at least temporarily). In adults, the commonest
      predisposing factor is alcohol, sometimes with other drugs. A signiﬁcant
      proportion reﬂect attempted suicide. In the UK, marine near drowning is
      usually associated with hypothermia (b p.254).
      Pathophysiology
      Wet drowning Involves signiﬁcant aspiration of ﬂuid into the lungs. This
      causes pulmonary vasoconstriction and hypertension with ventilation/
      perfusion mismatch, aggravated by surfactant destruction and washout,
      d lung compliance and atelectasis. Acute respiratory failure is common.
      ABG shows hypoxia, hypercarbia, and mixed respiratory/metabolic
      acidosis. The onset of symptoms can occur rapidly, but in lesser insults,
      symptoms may be delayed.
      Contamination Water contaminated with chemical waste, detergents etc.,
      may induce further lung injury.
      Electrolytes Irrespective of whether aspirated water is salt, fresh, or
      swimming pool, changes in serum electrolytes and blood volume are
      similar, and are rarely immediately life-threatening.
      Gastric ﬂuid Swallowing of ﬂuid into the stomach, with gastric dilatation,
      vomiting, and aspiration, is common.
      Dry drowning In 810–20% of deaths from drowning, a small amount of
      water entering the larynx causes persistent laryngospasm, which results
      in asphyxia and an immediate outpouring of thick mucus, froth, and foam,
      but without signiﬁcant aspiration—this is ‘dry drowning’.
      Secondary drowning A deterioration in a previously apparently well
      patient following successful resuscitation after submersion. It may occur
      in 5–10% of initial survivors.
      The mammalian diving reﬂex
      This is probably seen only in young children, but may explain why
      successful resuscitation without neurological deﬁcit can occur after
      prolonged immersion. Cold water stimulates facial nerve afferents, while
      hypoxia stimulates the carotid body chemoreceptors. These effects
      reﬂexively d heart rate and vasoconstrict skin, GI tract and skeletal
      muscle vessels, redistributing blood to the brain and heart. Associated
      hypothermia results in d metabolic demands, delaying cerebral hypoxia.
                                 DROWNING AND NEAR DROWNING                   259

Management
• Consider associated injury (eg to the cervical spine from diving into a
  shallow pool or surﬁng), and treat appropriately.
• Maintain the airway. Remove regurgitated ﬂuid/debris by suction of the
  upper airway. Ensure adequate ventilation and correction of hypoxia.
  If the patient does not have a gag reﬂex or is apnoeic, ventilate with
  a bag and mask and proceed to early tracheal intubation and IPPV. In
  spontaneously breathing patients, give the highest FiO2 possible. IPPV
  will be required if hypoxia and/or hypercapnia are present despite O2
  therapy, or if there are signs of pulmonary oedema. Ventilation with
  PEEP may signiﬁcantly improve oxygenation by i functional residual
  capacity, improving V/Q mismatch and enhancing ﬂuid resorption from
  the pulmonary bed. However, PEEP may d venous return to the heart.
• If the patient is in cardiac arrest, commence CPR (b p.46). Deﬁbrillation
  may not be successful until core T°>30°C (b p.256). Appropriate rapid
  core rewarming techniques are required.
• Remove all wet/cold clothing.
• Monitor core T° and start rewarming (b p.256).
• NG tube to relieve gastric dilatation.
• Check U&E, blood glucose, ABG, FBC, CXR, ECG.
• Consider the possibility of alcohol, illegal drugs or drug overdose. Keep
  urine and blood samples and test if appropriate, eg paracetamol.
• Do not use ‘prophylactic’ steroids or barbiturates.
• Antibiotics may be warranted if contaminated water (eg sewage) is
  involved (see b Leptospirosis, p.239).
• Inhalation of mud/sand etc may require bronchoscopy for clearance.
Outcome
Resuscitation without cerebral deﬁcit is possible after prolonged submer-
sion (even >60min), particularly if associated with hypothermia. 50% of
children
      _
         recovered apparently lifeless will survive, and even adults with
GCS3 4/15 and ﬁxed dilated pupils can survive unimpaired.
Respiratory effort is a sensitive prognostic sign, but in hypothermic
patients its absence does not necessarily imply poor outcome. Note the
time to the ﬁrst spontaneous inspiratory gasp.
Poor prognostic factors include extremes of age, severe acidosis,
immersion >5 min, and coma on admission.
Good prognostic factors include patients who are alert on admission,
hypothermia, older children/adults, brief submersion time, and those
who receive rapid on-scene basic life support and respond to initial
resuscitation measures.
Asymptomatic patients who have no abnormality on repeated clinical
examination, ABG and CXR require observation for at least 4–6 hours
prior to considering discharge. Admit all others to ICU or general ward
as appropriate.
260    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Diving emergencies: 1
      Consider any symptom developing within 48 hours of a dive as related to
      the dive until proven otherwise. On suspicion of a diving-related episode,
      seek specialist advice urgently (see Table 6.1).
      Diving related emergencies fall into four main categories: drowning
      (b p.258), barotrauma, decompression illness, and marine bites or stings
      (b p.416).
      Barotrauma
      May occur in any gas-containing body cavity during descent or ascent.
      Descent barotrauma (‘squeeze’) results from compression of gas
      in enclosed spaces as the ambient pressure i. Commonly, the ears,
      sinuses and skin are affected. Middle ear squeeze may be precipitated
      by Eustachian tube congestion and leads to erythema, haemorrhage, or
      tympanic membrane perforation with conductive hearing loss. Round or
      oval window rupture (inner ear squeeze) occurs with sudden pressure
      changes between the middle and inner ear and results in acute tinnitus,
      vertigo and deafness, and a perilymphatic ﬁstula. ENT opinion is urgently
      required if a perilymphatic ﬁstula is suspected and for cases of severe or
      continuing symptoms. If tympanic membrane rupture has not occurred,
      middle ear squeeze can usually be managed with decongestants/simple
      analgesics. If it has ruptured, give antibiotics (b p.551). Instruct the
      patient not to dive until the symptoms have resolved and the drum has
      completely healed.
      Sinus barotrauma has a similar aetiology to middle ear injury and is often
      associated with URTI, mucosal polyps and sinusitis. Treat similarly to ear
      barotrauma.
      Divers who fail to exhale periodically via the nose into their face mask
      during descent may develop ‘face mask squeeze’ (skin barotrauma).
      Erythema, bruising, and petechial and conjunctival haemorrhages develop
      in the enclosed area. Skin tightly enclosed by parts of the diving suit can
      have similar appearances. Usually no treatment is required.
      Ascent barotrauma is the reverse of squeeze, and particularly affects
      the lungs. It may be caused by breath-holding during rapid uncontrolled
      ascent or by air trapping in patients with asthma or congenital lung
      bullae. Mediastinal emphysema is the commonest event and presents
      with i hoarseness, neck swelling, and retrosternal chest discomfort.
      Symptoms usually resolve spontaneously with high concentrations of
      O2. Pneumothorax is a potentially life-threatening complication if it
      develops during the dive, as the intrapleural gas cannot be vented and
      increasing ascent will precipitate tension. Conventional treatment by
      needle decompression, aspiration or chest drain insertion (b p.336) is
      required.
      Dental pain may occur on ascent or descent in carious teeth or those
      which have had recent ﬁllings. The affected tooth is tender on tapping.
      Treat symptomatically with analgesics and arrange dental referral.
                                                             DIVING EMERGENCIES: 1                  261

 Table 6.1 Sources of advice on diving emergencies and hyperbaric
 chambers
 England, Wales, Northern Ireland
 • Diving Incident Telephone Advice Line,           Telephone 07831 151523 (24 hrs)
   Institute of Naval Medicine Gosport,             Ask for Duty Diving Medical Ofﬁcer
   Hampshire
 • Diving Diseases Research Centre                  Telephone 01752 209999 (24 hrs)
   Plymouth                                         Ask for the Duty Diving Doctor
   www.ddrc.org

 Scotland
 • Hyperbaric Medicine Unit                         Telephone 0845 408 6008
   Aberdeen Royal Inﬁrmary                          State ‘diving emergency’. Give your
   www.hyperchamber.com                             name and telephone number. Ask for
                                                    the Duty Hyperbaric Doctor
 In the event of any difﬁculties in contacting
 these agencies in the UK, telephone 999
 and ask for COASTGUARD

 Other countries
 • Divers Alert Network                             DAN Diving Emergency Hotline
   www.diversalertnetwork.org                       (USA) +1 919 684 8111
 This has links to diving emergency contact
 numbers throughout the world

Further information
Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine Division, Institute of Naval Medicine (Gosport, Hampshire,
   England). http://www.royalnavy.mod.uk/training-and-people/rn-life/medical-branch/institute-of-
   naval-medicine/diving-and-hyperbaric-medicine-division-dhmd/
Diving Diseases Research Centre (Hyperbaric Medical Centre, Plymouth, England). www.ddrc.org
British Hyperbaric Association. www.hyperbaric.org.uk/
Scottish Diving Medicine. www.sdm.scot.nhs.uk
Divers Alert Network. www.diversalertnetwork.org
262    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Diving emergencies: 2
      Decompression illness
      There are two forms of decompression illness. The ﬁrst occurs when
      dissolved nitrogen in blood and tissues is not expelled at a sufﬁcient rate
      to prevent bubble formation. The second occurs when air bubbles are
      released into the circulation because of pulmonary barotrauma. This
      follows if air bubbles enter the pulmonary capillaries from ruptured
      alveoli. The bubbles travel via the left side of the heart to the systemic
      circulation. Cerebral air embolism usually causes symptoms as the diver
      surfaces, with loss of consciousness, ﬁts, cardiovascular collapse and chest
      pain. Clinically, differentiation between the two forms is difﬁcult and initial
      management is the same. In general, the sooner the onset of symptoms,
      the greater the likely severity. Symptoms may be attributed by the patient
      (and the unwary doctor) to musculoskeletal sprains/strains or other minor
      injury.
      Decompression illness is more likely in divers who have not followed safe
      ascent recommendations, the obese, in cold water, and when excessive
      exercise has occurred during the dive. It may be precipitated by air travel
      if insufﬁcient time is left between diving and ﬂying for residual nitrogen
      to leave the body in a controlled fashion. Bubbles have direct mechanical
      and local inﬂammatory effects, commonly involving joints, skin, CNS, lungs
      and ears.
      Joint pain, ‘the bends’, most often affects shoulders and elbows. A dull
      aching sensation, i by movement but without localized tenderness
      is common. Pruritic rashes, local swelling and a peau d’orange effect
      may occur. Back pain, limb weakness, sensory abnormalities or urinary
      retention imply spinal cord involvement. Central effects include focal
      deﬁcits, cerebellar disturbance and mood changes.
      Treatment for decompression illness is recompression. If delayed, risks
      of permanent damage to brain and spinal cord greatly i. The diagnosis of
      decompression sickness may only follow the response to recompression.
      Pending this, give the highest possible concentration of O2. Analgesics and
      sedatives can mask recompression responses and should only be used on
      specialist advice. Entonox® is absolutely contraindicated.
      If intubation is required, inﬂate the ET tube cuff with sterile water,
      since during recompression an air-ﬁlled cuff will deﬂate. IV ﬂuids (0.9%
      saline or a plasma expander) assist oxygenation of ischaemic tissues and
      facilitate discharge of excess tissue nitrogen load into the venous system
      by ensuring adequate circulating volume. Some centres may recommend
      aspirin and/or dextran solutions to d capillary sludging which accompanies
      severe decompression sickness.
      Despite dry or wet suits, hypothermia is common. Treat with appropriate
      passive or active rewarming (b p.256).
                                               DIVING EMERGENCIES: 2           263

Air evacuation If, after consultation with the diving medical centre, air
evacuation is necessary, unpressurized aircraft should not ﬂy above
300m. The diver should breathe 100% O2. On reaching the diving centre,
recompression to a simulated depth of 18m with 100% O2 occurs,
interspersed with periods of air breathing to d O2 toxicity risk. Slow
decompression then follows standard treatment protocols.
Divers usually dive in pairs. If a diver has symptoms of decompression
sickness or pulmonary barotrauma, his ‘buddy’ will be at risk also. Although
recompression may not be required in the buddy, transfer him/her along
with the affected diver and their diving equipment to the recompression
facility.
Obtain the following information before referral, if possible:
• The patient’s current condition, progression since onset, and response
  to treatment.
• Time of onset of symptoms related to the dive.
• Dive proﬁle and history (depth, duration, activity during the dive, speed
  of ascent including details of any stoppages, environmental conditions
  (water temperature, currents, etc.), pre-dive exercise, alcohol, drugs
  and food, type and condition of diving equipment used, clothing worn,
  other recent dives). Many divers store much of this information in a
  dive computer.
• Previous medical history, previous diving-related episodes, drug history.
264    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Heat illness
      Body T° is normally kept at 36–38°C by homeostatic mechanisms
      which are controlled by the hypothalamus. Hyperthermia occurs when
      these mechanisms are overwhelmed by factors acting individually, or
      (commonly) together. These conditions can occur even in temperate
      climates. At-risk groups include the young and the elderly in conditions
      of i temperature and humidity, and patients with unaccustomed or
      prolonged muscular activity (eg at ‘raves’, associated with ecstasy or
      other drugs), grand mal ﬁtting, athletes, marathon runners and armed
      forces recruits.
      Predisposing medical factors include
      • Alcohol use or withdrawal (including delirium tremens).
      • Cardiac disease.
      • Any condition which may cause or aggravate Na+/H2O loss
        (eg gastroenteritis, cystic ﬁbrosis).
      • Drugs, including: alcohol, diuretics, salicylates, anticholinergics (antihis-
        tamines, tricyclic antidepressants), sympathomimetics (amphetamines,
        ecstasy, LSD, cocaine, phencyclidine, appetite suppressants), phenothi-
        azines, antipsychotics, MAOI, SSRI.
      Heat illness has a spectrum of severity:
      Heat cramps ⇔ Heat exhaustion ⇔ Heat stroke
      In heat cramps/exhaustion, homeostatic mechanisms still function, but are
      overwhelmed.
      In heat stroke, all thermoregulatory control is lost, body temperature i
      rapidly to very high levels (>41°C) causing widespread severe tissue and
      organ damage. Mortality may exceed 10%.
      Heat cramps
      Core T° of 37–39°C. Mental function is normal. Sweating during exercise
      and replacement with hypotonic ﬂuid leads to Na+ deﬁciency. Brief
      cramps occur in muscles used in heavy work, usually after exertion.
      Heat exhaustion
      Core T°<40°C. Mental function is normal. Characterized by mixed
      Na+/H2O depletion. Sweating and tachycardia are usually present.
      Symptoms of weakness, fatigue, headache, vertigo, nausea and vomiting,
      postural dizziness, syncope. Patients will recover with rest and ﬂuids.
      In mild cases, remove from heat and use simple cooling techniques.
      Rehydrate with oral electrolyte solutions.
      More severe cases require IV 0.9% saline or 0.45% saline/5% dextrose. Use
      clinical assessment, U&E and haematocrit to guide infusion rate. Up to 4L
      of ﬂuid may be required over 6–12hr. Avoid over-rapid infusion which
      may cause pulmonary and/or cerebral oedema.
      Measurement of core temperature
      Tympanic or rectal T° measurement is appropriate in the ED, but may
      underestimate core T° and respond slowly as this changes. Oesophageal
      and intravascular probes give the most accurate readings of core T° but
      require special equipment.
                                                               HEAT ILLNESS         265

Heat stroke
Suspect in collapse during or after exercise and in high risk groups. Core
T° is >41°C (but signiﬁcant cooling can occur before arrival in the ED).
There is multi-system damage especially to the CNS. Outcome depends
upon the height and duration of i T°. Mortality is 810%.
• CNS: oedema + petechial haemorrhages cause focal/generalized       –
                                                                        damage.
• Muscle injury releases enzymes, myoglobin, urate, K+, PO43 .
• Liver: damaged cells release enzymes. Jaundice commonly develops after
  24hr.
• Kidneys: ARF from hypovolaemia, muscle breakdown products, acidosis,
  DIC.
• Blood: DIC, thrombocytopenia, leucocytosis.
• Metabolic: i or d K+, metabolic acidosis, respiratory alkalosis, hypoglycaemia.
Features
Sweating may be present. The skin surface may feel deceptively cool due
to peripheral vasoconstriction.
• CNS: confusion, delirium, ﬁtting, coma, oculogyric crisis, dilated pupils,
  tremor, muscle rigidity, decerebrate posturing, cerebellar dysfunction.
• CVS: tachycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias.
• Coagulopathy: purpura, conjunctival haemorrhages, melaena, haematuria.
Investigations
                                                                    –
ABG, U&E, BMG, CK, clotting screen, LFTs, urate, Ca2+, PO43 , ECG, CXR.
Treatment
• Rapid therapy is vital. Do not wait for the results of investigations.
• Remove the patient from the hot environment and remove all clothing.
• Secure the airway (intubation and IPPV if needed). Give high FiO2.
• Cooling techniques depend upon facilities available and the clinical state
  of the patient. Do not give ‘antipyretics’ such as aspirin/paracetamol.
  Evaporative cooling is the most efﬁcient and applicable treatment. Spray the
  naked patient with tepid tap water and blow air over the body with fans.
  Ice-packs can be applied to the axillae, groins, neck, and scalp (but avoid
  prolonged contact). Consider cold gastric or peritoneal lavage, or cardiopul-
  monary bypass if these techniques fail. Aim for cooling rate of at least 0.1°C/
  min. When core T° <39°C stop active cooling as hypothermia may develop.
• IV ﬂuids: give 50mL 50% dextrose IV if BMG <3mmol/litre. Severe hypo-
  volaemia is uncommon. If hypotension persists despite d T°, give IV
  0.9% saline (1–1.5L over 1–2hr). Avoid overloading circulation with risk
  of pulmonary/cerebral oedema. CVP monitoring may be needed. CVP
  may be initially i due to peripheral vasoconstriction.
• Insert a urinary catheter. If myoglobinuria is present, aim for i urine
  output, and consider giving IV bicarbonate and/or mannitol.
• If ﬁts occur, give IV lorazepam—but beware of respiratory depression.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is an idiosyncratic reaction in patients on
antipsychotics (especially haloperidol, thioridazine, chlorpromazine). Features
are muscle rigidity, extrapyramidal signs, autonomic dysfunction, severe
dyskinesia. Stop the antipsychotic, cool the patient, and give dantrolene.
Malignant hyperpyrexia is a rare autosomal dominant condition related to
use of suxamethonium and volatile anaesthetics. Dantrolene prevents Ca2+
release from skeletal muscle and is very effective: initial dose is 2–3mg/kg IV,
then 1 mg/kg as needed, max total dose 10 mg/kg. See guidelines: www.
aagbi.org/publications/guidelines/docs/malignanthyp07amended.pdf
266    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Electrical injuries
      An electric shock can cause cardiac and respiratory arrest. The heart
      often restarts spontaneously, but the respiratory arrest may be prolonged,
      causing fatal hypoxia. Thermal injury from the electric current produces
      burns and muscle damage. Muscle spasms from a shock may result in
      dislocations or fractures or precipitate a fall causing major trauma. Fatal
      electrocution can occur from domestic electricity (in the UK 230 volts,
      alternating current at 50cycles/sec), but severe injury is more common
      with high voltage shocks (>1000V).
      Lightning causes a direct current (DC) shock at a very high voltage (up to
      100,000,000V), but short duration (0.1–1msec).
      Electrical ﬂash and arc burns
      An electrical short-circuit near to a person may cause sudden vaporization
      of metal and deposition of a thin layer of hot metal on the skin, without
      any electricity passing through the casualty. Electrical ﬂash burns may look
      dramatic because of discolouration of the skin, but are often superﬁcial and
      heal uneventfully. In contrast, electrical arcing produces high temperatures,
      and may cause deep dermal or full thickness burns, especially if clothing
      is set alight.
      Contact burns
      If electricity has passed through the patient there are usually two or
      more entry or exit wounds, which are full thickness burns with white or
      charred edges. Tissue damage is more extensive than the visible burns,
      especially with high voltage injuries. Deeper layers of skeletal muscle
      may be involved and muscle damage can cause myoglobinuria and renal
      failure. Myonecrosis and oedema of muscles may produce a compartment
      syndrome (b p.398).
      If current passes through the torso, cardiac arrhythmias are more likely
      than if only a single limb is involved. Myocardial damage may occur, often
      in association with vascular injuries.
      Neurological effects of electric shocks include coma, ﬁts, headaches,
      transient paralysis, peripheral neuropathy, and mood disturbances.
      Ophthalmic injuries are common after electrical burns of the head.
      Cataracts and glaucoma may develop later.
      Electrocution in pregnancy has major risks for the foetus (spontaneous
      abortion has been reported). Obtain obstetric advice.
      Lightning
      The sudden vaporization of sweat and rain water caused by lightning may
      explode clothes and shoes off the victim and rupture ear drums. Lightning
      burns are superﬁcial, often with a characteristic feathered or fern-like
      appearance. The limbs are often cold and mottled due to arterial spasm,
      which usually resolves over a few hours. Deep muscle damage and myoglob-
      inuria are rare. Coma may result from direct brain injury, head injury due to
      a fall, or cardiac arrest. CPR, if indicated, may be successful even if required
      for prolonged periods. Survivors may be confused and amnesic for several
      days and may have ﬁts and temporary paralysis. Cataracts are common.
                                                   ELECTRICAL INJURIES          267

Management
• At the scene, make sure that the current is turned off before anyone
  approaches or touches the casualty. Remember that high voltage elec-
  tricity can arc through the air or pass through the ground.
• Check the airway, breathing and circulation. Electrical burns of the
  mouth and throat may cause oedema and airway obstruction.
• Perform CPR if necessary, but minimize movement of the spine in case
  of trauma.
• Examine thoroughly for head, chest, abdominal and skeletal injuries.
• Examine all over for skin entry/exit burns, and check pulses and
  sensation.
• Check the ECG: there may be arrhythmias (eg atrial ﬁbrillation),
  conduction defects, ST elevation and T wave changes.
• Check FBC, U&E and creatine kinase (except in minor low-voltage
  burns).
• Test the urine for blood. If the stick test is +ve for blood, but there are
  no red blood cells on microscopy, treat for myoglobinuria to prevent
  renal failure: obtain specialist advice, maintain a high urine output, and
  consider using mannitol ± isotonic sodium bicarbonate.
• Fluid loss into muscles results in hypovolaemia: IV ﬂuids are often
  required. After high voltage injuries, widespread fasciotomies may be
  needed, with excision or amputation of non-viable tissues and inspec-
  tion and further debridement after 48 hours.
Admission
It is reasonable to allow home asymptomatic patients with domestic
and minor low voltage burns, a normal ECG, no history suggestive of
arrhythmia (eg palpitations) and no myoglobinuria, but advise review if any
problem develops.
Admit children who bite electric ﬂexes for observation, because of the
risk of delayed bleeding from labial blood vessels.
Many patients with electrical injuries will need admission for observation
and monitoring. Admit all patients with high voltage conduction injuries,
cardiac arrhythmias, chest pain or ECG abnormalities, vascular injury or
myoglobinuria.
268    CHAPTER 6 Environmental emergencies

      Radiation incidents
      In the UK, 24 hour advice and assistance is available via NAIR (National
      Arrangements for Incidents involving Radioactivity) on telephone 0800
      834153 or via the police. Try to distinguish between external irradia-
      tion of a person and contamination with radioactive material. Someone
      exposed to X-rays or to gamma rays in a radiation sterilizing unit receives
      no further radiation after removal from the source, and there is no risk
      of contaminating anyone else. However, a person contaminated with
      radioactive material is still exposed to radiation and needs urgent, careful
      decontamination to minimize the risks to himself and to other people.
      Some hospitals are ofﬁcially designated for the care of casualties contami-
      nated with radioactive substances, but in an emergency a patient may be
      taken to any ED, where a plan for such events should exist.
      Anticipation of a radiation accident
      • Inform the ED consultant on duty immediately if a patient from a
        radiation incident arrives or is expected.
      • Get advice and help from a radiation physicist (from Medical Physics or
        radiotherapy department).
      • Implement the appropriate Radiation Incident Plan to deal with the patient.
      • Expect media enquiries.
      Treatment of contaminated casualties
      Where possible, treatment should take place in a designated
      decontamination room. This room should have a separate entrance,
      ventilation arrangements, decontamination facilities with shower, and
      contaminated water collection facilities. Cover the ﬂoor of this room and
      entrance/exit corridors with disposable sheeting. All staff must themselves
      be decontaminated and checked before leaving this area.
      • Turn off air conditioning.
      • Pregnant and potentially pregnant staff should not be involved.
      • Provide any necessary life-saving treatment, but avoid spreading
        contamination.
      • ‘Barrier nurse’, as for an infectious disease.
      • Assume patients are contaminated until they have been checked by the
        radiation physicist.
      • Instruct patients and staff not to eat, drink, or smoke.
      • Involve the minimum number of staff, who should wear facemasks,
        theatre clothing with impermeable gowns or plastic aprons, two pairs of
        gloves, and overshoes or rubber boots.
      • Restrict and record movements of people in and out of the room.
      • Ensure that the ambulance crew waits for monitoring of themselves and
        their vehicle.
      • Keep everything that may be contaminated for radiation testing.
      • Collect the patient’s clothes, dressings, swabs, and any equipment used
        in plastic bags, and keep them in the decontamination room.
      • All blood/urine samples must be specially labelled and the laboratories
        informed of the radiation risk.
      • Life-threatening injuries may take precedence over all of the above,
        such that patients may need to be managed in the resuscitation room.
                                                 RADIATION INCIDENTS             269

Decontamination of the patient
The radiation physicist should determine the sites of contamination and
monitor the effectiveness of treatment. The object is to remove any
contaminating substance and minimize absorption into the body, especially
via the mouth, nose, and wounds.
• Cover any wounds prior to decontamination.
• Avoid splashing.
• Radioactive material can usually be removed from intact skin by washing
   with soap and water. Gentle scrubbing may be needed, but it is impor-
   tant to avoid damaging the skin. Carefully clean wounds and irrigate
   with water or saline.
• Clean the mouth using a mouthwash and a soft toothbrush, with care to
   avoid swallowing any ﬂuid.
• Instruct the patient to blow their nose into paper handkerchiefs. If the
   nose is still contaminated irrigate it with small amounts of water.
• Irrigate each eye from the medial side outwards to avoid draining
   contaminated water into the nasolacrimal duct.
• Clean the hair by washing with shampoo and by clipping if contamina-
   tion persists, but do not shave the scalp.
• If monitoring shows that all contamination has been removed, treat the
   patient as for an irradiated, but uncontaminated patient. However, if
   contamination persists, or if radioactive material has been ingested or
   inhaled, further treatment will be needed after discussion with a radia-
   tion specialist.
• Check all staff involved in treating the patient for radioactive contami-
   nation before they leave the treatment area.
The irradiated patient
A patient who has been irradiated or contaminated with radiation may be
at risk of radiation sickness or other ill effects. Admit to a designated unit
for assessment and follow-up by a radiotherapist or other specialist.
Initial symptoms of radiation sickness are malaise, nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhoea, starting a few hours after exposure. There is then a latent
period before the main effects of radiation sickness appear. Record any
symptoms and the time of onset. The effects of anxiety and stress may be
similar to the early features of radiation sickness.
Take blood for FBC, U&E, and blood group, recording the time on the
blood tubes and in the notes. Measurement of the lymphocyte count and
analysis of chromosomes at known times after exposure are helpful in
assessing the amount of radiation received and determining the prognosis.
A low (<1.0 × 109/L) or falling lymphocyte count indicates serious
radiation exposure.
Further information
Radiation incidents
http://www.hpa.org.uk/Topics/Radiation/UnderstandingRadiation/
UnderstandingRadiationTopics/RadiationIncidents/incid_Nair/
www.hpa.org.uk (Health Protection Agency).
Deliberate release and CBRN incidents (see also b p.210)
www.hpa.org.uk/emergency/CBRN.htm
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 7                                                 271

Analgesia and anaesthesia

Pain relief                                          272
Analgesics: aspirin and paracetamol                  274
Analgesics: NSAIDs                                   275
Analgesics: opioids                                  276
Analgesics: Entonox® and ketamine                    278
Analgesia for trauma                                 279
Analgesia in speciﬁc situations                      280
Local anaesthesia                                    282
Local anaesthetic toxicity                           284
General principles of local anaesthesia              286
Topical anaesthesia                                  288
Local anaesthetic administration                     289
Bier’s block                                         290
Local anaesthetic nerve blocks                       292
Digital nerve block                                  294
Nerve blocks at the wrist                            296
Nerve blocks of forehead and ear                     300
Dental anaesthesia                                   302
Intercostal nerve block                              303
Femoral nerve block                                  304
Nerve blocks at the ankle                            306
Sedation                                             308
General anaesthesia in the emergency department      310
Emergency anaesthesia and rapid sequence induction   312
Difﬁcult intubation                                  314
General anaesthetic drugs                            316
272    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Pain relief
      Many patients who come to the ED are in pain. Knowledge of the site and
      characteristics of the pain is often important in diagnosing the problem.
      Relief of pain is an essential and urgent part of treatment. Pain and distress
      may prevent patients giving useful details of history and symptoms and
      may not allow them to co-operate with investigations or treatment.
      Methods of pain relief
      Relieving pain often requires analgesic drugs, but other types of treat-
      ment are sometimes more important. If an injury is more painful than
      expected consider the possibility of infection (eg necrotizing fasciitis,
      b p.234) or vascular compromise. Severe pain despite immobilization of
      a fracture suggests a vascular injury, compartment syndrome (b p.398)
      or a tight plaster (b p.424). Reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy (Sudeck’s
      atrophy) may also cause severe pain starting a few days after relatively
      minor trauma.
      Splintage
      Immobilization of a fracture helps to relieve pain and d requirement for
      analgesic drugs. Inhalation analgesia with Entonox® (b p.278) is often
      helpful while the splint or cast is being applied.
      Elevation
      Many limb injuries produce considerable swelling, which causes pain
      and stiffness. Elevate the limb to d swelling, relieve the pain, and allow
      mobilization as soon as possible.
      Cold
      Cool burns as soon as possible, usually in cold water, to relieve the pain
      and stop any continuing thermal injury. Chemical burns from hydroﬂuoric
      acid (b p.397) are often extremely painful and need prolonged cooling
      in iced water. Pain from recent sprains and muscle injuries may be d by
      cooling with ice-packs (or a pack of frozen peas) applied for 10–15min at a
      time, with a piece of towelling between the ice-pack and the skin.
      Heat
      Pain following sprains and strains of the neck, back, and limbs is often
      caused by muscle spasm. It may be eased by heat from a hot bath, hot
      water bottle, or heat lamp.
      Dressings
      Pain from minor burns and ﬁngertip injuries often resolves after a suitable
      dressing is applied.
      Local anaesthesia (LA)
      LA provides excellent pain relief for fractured shaft of femur (b p.304,
      472) and for some ﬁnger and hand injuries (b p.292). Strongly consider
      giving analgesia with LA before obtaining X-rays. Check for any possible
      nerve injury before injecting LA.
                                                               PAIN RELIEF       273

Deﬁnitive treatment
Reducing a pulled elbow or trephining a subungual haematoma usually
gives immediate relief of pain, so no analgesia is needed.
Psychological aspects of pain relief
Anxiety and distress accompany pain and worsen patients’ suffering.
Psychological support is needed, as well as physical relief from pain.
Patients are helped by caring staff who explain what is happening and
provide support and reassurance. The presence of family members or a
close friend is often helpful.
Analgesics
Many different analgesic drugs are available, but it is best to use only a few
and become familiar with their actions, dosages, side effects, and contrain-
dications. Most hospitals have analgesic policies and limit the choice of
drugs which may be used. Before prescribing any drug, check what treat-
ment has been given. The patient may already be taking analgesia or have
supplies at home. Many drugs interact with others: important drug inter-
actions are listed in the BNF. Ask about drug allergies and record them.
Before giving aspirin or NSAIDs ask and record about indigestion, peptic
ulceration and asthma.
274    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Analgesics: aspirin and paracetamol
      Aspirin
      Aspirin is a good analgesic for headaches, musculoskeletal pain and
      dysmenorrhea, and has antipyretic and mild anti-inﬂammatory actions. It
      interacts with warfarin, some anticonvulsants and other drugs, and may
      exacerbate asthma and cause gastric irritation.
      • Do not use aspirin in children <16 years or during breast feeding.
      • Adult dose PO is 300–900mg 4–6 hourly (max 4g daily).
      Paracetamol (‘acetaminophen’ in USA)
      Paracetamol has similar analgesic and antipyretic actions to aspirin, but has
      no anti-inﬂammatory effects and causes less gastric irritation.
      • The therapeutic dose range of paracetamol in children and adults is
        10–15 mg/kg. In severe symptoms maximum single dose is 20 mg/kg.
        Adults and children who are small for age should be weighed and the
        dose calculated. In most patients the dose can safely be based on age.
      • The adult dose is 0.5–1g 4–6 hourly (maximum 4g in 24 hours).
      • For children aged less than 6 years use paracetamol infant suspension
        (120 mg/5 mL).
         • 2–3 months (babies with weight > 4 kg, born after 37 weeks):
           2.5 mL (60 mg). If necessary a second 2.5 mL dose may be given
           after 4–6 hours. Do not give more than two doses in 24 hours.
         • 3–6 months: 2.5 mL (60 mg)
         • 6–24 months: 5 mL (120 mg)
         • 2–4 years: 7.5 mL (180 mg)
         • 4–6 years: 10 mL (240 mg).
      • For children aged 6 years and over use paracetamol six plus suspension
        (250 mg/5 mL):
         • 6–8 years: 5 mL (250 mg)
         • 8–10 years: 7.5 mL (375 mg)
         • 10–12 years: 10 mL (500 mg).
      • Paracetamol may be repeated 4–6 hourly. Adults, and children older
        than 3 months, may have a maximum of four doses in 24 hours.
      • Overdosage can cause liver and renal damage (b p.190).
      Compound analgesics (paracetamol + opioid)
      Compound analgesic tablets containing paracetamol and low doses of
      opioids are widely used, but have little beneﬁt over paracetamol alone and
      cause more side effects, such as constipation and dizziness, particularly in
      elderly people. These compound preparations include:
      • Co-codamol 8/500 (codeine phosphate 8mg, paracetamol 500mg).
      • Co-dydramol (dihydrocodeine tartrate 10mg, paracetamol 500mg).
      Compound preparations of paracetamol and full doses of opioids, eg
      co-codamol 30/500 (codeine phosphate 30mg, paracetamol 500mg), are
      more potent than paracetamol alone, but may cause opioid side effects,
      including nausea, vomiting, constipation, dizziness, drowsiness and respiratory
      depression. Opioid dependency can occur with prolonged usage.
                                                    ANALGESICS: NSAIDs           275

Analgesics: NSAIDs
Non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs
NSAIDs are often used to treat musculoskeletal pain, with or without
inﬂammation, although in many cases non-drug treatment (heat or cold,
elevation) and paracetamol should be tried ﬁrst. NSAIDs can cause gastric
irritation, diarrhoea, GI bleeding and perforation, with i risk at higher drug
dosage and in patients aged >60 years and those with a history of peptic
ulcer. NSAIDs may exacerbate asthma and can precipitate renal failure
in patients with heart failure, cirrhosis or renal insufﬁciency. Interactions
occur with diuretics, warfarin, lithium and other drugs (see BNF). When
possible, advise that NSAIDs be taken after food to d risk of GI side
effects. If NSAID treatment is essential in patients at high risk of GI prob-
lems consider prophylactic treatment with misoprostol (see BNF).
Many NSAIDs are available and all can cause serious adverse effects,
but ibuprofen, diclofenac and naproxen are relatively safe and cover
most requirements. Ibuprofen has the lowest incidence of side effects,
is the cheapest of these drugs and may be bought without prescription.
Ibuprofen is useful in children as an analgesic and antipyretic, especially
when paracetamol is insufﬁcient.
• Ibuprofen dosage 1.2–1.8g daily in 3–4 divided doses (max 2.4g daily).
   Child (>7kg): 20mg/kg daily in 3–4 divided doses.
• Diclofenac (oral or rectal) 75–150mg daily in 2–3 divided doses.
• Naproxen 500mg initially, then 250mg 6–8-hourly (max 1.25g daily).
   Acute gout 750mg initially, then 250mg 8-hourly until pain resolves.
Injectable NSAIDs
Some NSAIDs may be given by injection for musculoskeletal pain (eg acute
low back pain), or for renal or biliary colic. The contraindications and side
effects are the same as for oral treatment. Intramuscular (IM) injections
are painful and can cause sterile abscesses, so oral or rectal treatment is
preferable. NSAIDs provide effective analgesia for renal colic, but the onset
is slower than with IV opioids, which some prefer. A NSAID is particularly
useful in suspected drug addicts who claim to have renal colic.
• Ketorolac may be given IM or slowly IV (initial dose 10mg over at least
   15sec: see BNF). It is useful as an adjunct for MUAs.
• Diclofenac must be given by deep IM injection (not IV, which causes
   venous thrombosis). Dose: 75mg, repeated if necessary after 30min
   (max 150mg in 24 hours).
Topical NSAIDs
NSAID gels or creams applied to painful areas provide some analgesia, but
are less effective than oral treatment. Systemic absorption may occur and
cause adverse effects as for oral NSAIDs.
276    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Analgesics: opioids
      Morphine
      Morphine is the standard analgesic for severe pain. As well as providing
      analgesia, it is sometimes used for cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (b p.101)
      to relieve distress and to help increase venous capacitance.
      Morphine often causes nausea and vomiting in adults, so consider giving an
      anti-emetic (cyclizine 50mg IV/IM or prochlorperazine 12.5mg IM). Anti-
      emetics are not usually necessary in children aged < 10years.
      Other side-effects of opioids include drowsiness and constipation. Respiratory
      depression and hypotension may occur, especially with large doses.
      Pinpoint pupils can complicate neurological assessment. Naloxone
      (b p.188) reverses the effects of opioids.
      In acute conditions, give morphine by slow IV injection, which provides
      rapid but controlled analgesia. The dose varies with the patient and the
      degree of pain. Titrate the dose depending on the response: 2mg may be
      adequate in a frail old lady, but sometimes >20mg is needed in a young ﬁt
      person with severe injuries. Dilute morphine with 0.9% saline to 1mg/mL
      (label the syringe clearly) and give it slowly IV (1–2mg/min in adults) in
      1mg increments until pain is relieved. Give further analgesia if pain recurs.
      IV morphine dose in children is 100–200micrograms/kg, given in increments,
      repeated as necessary. Patient-controlled analgesia using a computerized
      syringe pump is very good for post-operative analgesia, but rarely appro-
      priate in the ED.
      IM injections provide slower and less controlled effects than IV analgesia:
      avoid their use, especially in shocked patients. IM morphine could be used
      in children needing strong analgesia but not IV ﬂuids (eg while dressing
      superﬁcial burns), but oral or nasal analgesia is preferable.
      • Morphine may be given orally as Oramorph® oral solution:
         • child aged 1–5 years: max dose 5mg (2.5mL);
         • child aged 6–12 years: max dose 5–10mg (2.5–5mL).
      • Codeine is given orally for moderate pain (30–60mg 4hrly, max 240mg
         daily) and has side effects similar to morphine. Codeine may also be
         given IM (but not IV, because it may cause hypotension).
      • Dihydrocodeine is very similar to codeine.
      • Diamorphine (heroin) has similar effects to morphine, but is more soluble
         and so can be dissolved in a very small volume of diluent. Nasal diamor-
         phine provides effective analgesia in children (b p.281).
      • Fentanyl is a short-acting opioid which is often used in anaesthesia.
      • Pethidine provides rapid but brief analgesia, but is less potent than mor-
         phine. It is sometimes used for renal or biliary colic in preference to
         morphine, which occasionally causes smooth muscle spasm (b p.277).
         Pethidine is given slowly IV, titrated as necessary (usual adult dose 50mg
         IV), or less effectively IM (50–100mg). Give an anti-emetic with it.
                                                   ANALGESICS: OPIOIDS           277

Smooth muscle spasm due to opioid analgesics
In a few patients opioids such as morphine can cause severe pain due to
smooth muscle spasm, especially spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. About
5–20 minutes after morphine has been given, severe colicky abdominal
pain develops. This may be typical of biliary colic but can mimic renal colic,
intestinal perforation or myocardial infarction.
Pain from spasm of the sphincter of Oddi may be relieved by glucagon
(1mg IV, repeated if necessary) although this is liable to cause vomiting.
Naloxone (0.2mg IV, repeated if necessary) is also effective, but may
reverse desired analgesia. GTN can also relieve smooth muscle spasm of
the sphincter of Oddi. Glucagon is probably the treatment of choice for
this rare complication of opioid analgesia.
278    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Analgesics: Entonox® and ketamine
      Entonox®
      Entonox® is a mixture of 50% N2O and 50% O2. It is stored as a compressed
      gas in blue cylinders with a blue and white shoulder. It is unsuitable for use
      at <–6°C, since the gases separate and a hypoxic mixture could be given.
      Entonox® diffuses more rapidly than nitrogen and so is contraindicated
      with the following: undrained pneumothorax (since it may produce a
      tension pneumothorax), after diving (i risk of decompression sickness),
      facial injury, base of skull fracture, intestinal obstruction, d conscious level.
      Entonox® is controlled by a demand valve and inhaled through a mask or
      mouthpiece, often held by the patient. It gives rapid and effective analgesia
      and is widely used in prehospital care. In the ED, Entonox® is useful for
      initial analgesia, eg while splinting limb injuries, and for many minor proce-
      dures, such as reduction of a dislocated patella or ﬁnger. Tell the patient
      to breathe deeply through the mask or mouthpiece, and warn that he may
      feel drowsy or drunk, but that this will wear off within a few minutes.
      Ketamine
      Ketamine is a dissociative anaesthetic drug which may be given IM or IV by
      experts, and which provides strong analgesia in sub-anaesthetic dosage. It
      is rarely used in hospital practice for adults, because it may cause severe
      hallucinations, but these are less of a problem in children. It is very useful
      for sedation of children for procedures such as suturing of minor wounds.
      Ketamine is particularly useful in prehospital care and is the most appro-
      priate drug in the rare cases when a GA is needed outside hospital for
      extrication or emergency amputation.
      Airway-protective reﬂexes are maintained better with ketamine than
      with other induction agents, but airway obstruction and aspiration
      of gastric contents are still potential hazards. Respiratory depression
      is uncommon at normal dosage. Ketamine is a bronchodilator and may
      be used in asthmatics. It stimulates the cardiovascular system and often
      causes tachycardia and hypertension, so avoid it in severe hypertension.
      Hallucinations are less likely if a small dose of midazolam is given and the
      patient is not disturbed during recovery from anaesthesia.
      Ketamine is available in 3 strengths: 10, 50, and 100mg/mL, which are easily
      confused. The IV dose for GA is 1–2mg/kg over 1min, which is effective after
      2–7min and provides surgical anaesthesia for 5–10min. The IM dose for GA
      is 10mg/kg, which is effective after 4–15min and gives surgical anaesthesia
      for 12–25min. Further doses (10–20mg IV or 20–50mg IM) can be given if
      major limb movements or i muscle tone prevent extrication of the patient.
      For sedation of children undergoing suturing or other minor procedures,
      ketamine may be given IM (2.5mg/kg) or IV (1mg/kg over at least 1min).
      With this dose of ketamine, LA is needed for cleaning and suturing of
      wounds, but little physical restraint should be needed to allow the pro-
      cedure to take place. Occasionally, a second dose of ketamine (1mg/kg
      IM or 0.5mg/kg IV) is required to achieve adequate sedation. Larger initial
      doses provide deeper sedation, but are more likely to cause side effects
      (eg vomiting or agitation) during recovery. With low doses of ketamine,
      agitation is unlikely and there is no need to add midazolam.
                                              ANALGESIA FOR TRAUMA              279

Analgesia for trauma
Multiple injuries
Entonox® may be useful for analgesia during transport and initial resusci-
tation, but only allows administration of 50% O2 and should not be used
if there is an undrained pneumothorax. As soon as practicable use other
forms of analgesia, usually IV morphine (b p.276) and/or nerve blocks
(b p.292), and splint fractures to d pain and d blood loss.
Head injury
Relief of pain is particularly important in head-injured patients, since pain
and restlessness i ICP, which can exacerbate secondary brain injury.
Headache following a head injury can usually be treated with paracetamol,
diclofenac or codeine phosphate (which may cause less central depression
than stronger opioids such as morphine). If the headache is severe or
increasing, arrange a CT scan to look for an intracranial haematoma. Try to
avoid strong opioids, because of concern about sedation and respiratory
depression, but if pain is severe give morphine in small IV increments: the
effects can be reversed if necessary with naloxone. Femoral nerve block
is particularly useful in a patient with a head injury and a fractured femur,
since it d or avoids the need for opioids.
Small children with minor head injuries often deny having headaches, but
look and feel much better if given paracetamol (b p.274). Give further
doses if necessary over the following 12–24 hours.
Chest injury
Chest injuries are often extremely painful. Good analgesia is essential to
relieve distress and d risk of complications such as pneumonia and res-
piratory failure. Avoid Entonox® if a pneumothorax is a possibility, until
this has been excluded or drained. Give high concentration O2 as soon as
possible and check SpO2 and ABG. Give morphine in slow IV increments
(b p.276) and monitor for respiratory problems. Intercostal nerve blocks
(b p.303) provide good analgesia for fractured ribs, but may cause a
pneumothorax and should only be used in patients being admitted. In
severe chest injuries get anaesthetic or ICU help: thoracic epidural anaes-
thesia can sometimes avoid the need for IPPV. Before a thoracic epidural
is performed, check X-rays of the thoracic spine for fractures.
280    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Analgesia in speciﬁc situations
      Children
      Injured children are distressed by both fear and pain. Parental support
      can be very helpful. Sensitive treatment, explanation and reassurance are
      important, but give analgesia whenever necessary.
      Oral analgesia is usually with paracetamol (b p.274), but if this is inadequate
      add ibuprofen (b p.275), dihydrocodeine elixir, or Oramorph®:
      • Ibuprofen dose: 20mg/kg daily in divided doses as ibuprofen suspension
        (100mg in 5mL) 1–2 years: 2.5mL; 3–7 years: 5mL; 8–12 years: 10mL; all
        3–4 times daily.
      • Dihydrocodeine elixir dose: 0.5–1mg/kg PO 4–6-hourly.
      • Children in severe pain may beneﬁt from oral morphine (as Oramorph®
        oral solution—b p.276).
      Entonox® (b p.278) gives rapid analgesia without the need for an
      injection.
      IV morphine is appropriate in severe injuries, but take particular care if
      there is a head injury, since sedation may occur.
      Femoral nerve block (b p.304) provides good analgesia for femoral
      fractures and is usually well tolerated.
      Digital nerve block with bupivacaine (b p.294) is useful for painful ﬁnger
      injuries, especially crush injuries. Provide this before X-ray: when the
      child returns from X-ray the ﬁnger may then be cleaned and dressed
      painlessly.
      IM morphine could be used to provide analgesia for small burns or
      fractured arms, but oral morphine or nasal diamorphine are preferable,
      since IM injections are painful and unpleasant.
      Nasal diamorphine is not licensed, but is playing an increasing role in the
      provision of pain relief in children (see Table 7.1).
      Acute abdominal pain
      It is cruel and unnecessary to withhold analgesia from patients with acute
      abdominal pain. Adequate analgesia allows the patient to give a clearer
      history, and often facilitates examination and diagnosis: tenderness and
      rigidity become more localized, and masses more readily palpable. Good
      X-rays cannot be obtained if the patient is distressed and restless because
      of renal colic or a perforated ulcer.
      Morphine by slow IV injection (b p.276) is appropriate in severe pain,
      unless this is due to renal or biliary colic, in which an NSAID (b p.275)
      may be preferred. Morphine occasionally causes severe abdominal pain due
      to smooth muscle spasm of the sphincter of Oddi (b p.277).
      Toothache
      Toothache or pain after dental extractions can often be eased by aspirin,
      a NSAID or paracetamol. Do not give opioids such as codeine or
      dihydrocodeine, which may make the pain worse. Drainage of a dental
      abscess may be required to relieve toothache.
                                           ANALGESIA IN SPECIFIC SITUATIONS                  281

Nasal diamorphine for analgesia in children1,2
In the UK, diamorphine is licensed for use IV, IM, SC and PO. Nasal
diamorphine is unlicensed, but clinical studies and experience have shown
that this is an effective and acceptable method of analgesia for children
with limb fractures or small burns who do not need immediate venous
access. It should be given as soon as possible, prior to X-rays.
Contraindications: age <1 year (or weight <10kg), nasal obstruction or
injury, basal skull fracture, opioid sensitivity.
Verbal consent for nasal diamorphine should be obtained from the child’s
parents (and the child if appropriate), since this is an unlicensed route of
administration of this drug. Follow local protocols.
The dose of nasal diamorphine is 0.1mg/kg, given in a syringe in a volume
of 0.2mL. The child is weighed. The appropriate concentration of solution
for the weight of child is achieved by adding a suitable volume of 0.9%
saline to a 10mg ampoule of diamorphine.

 Table 7.1 Dosage of nasal diamorphine in children
 Weight (kg)       Volume of saline (mL) Dose of diamorphine (mg) in 0.2mL
 10                2.0                           1.0
 15                1.3                           1.5
 20                1.0                           2.0
 25                0.8                           2.5
 30                0.7                           2.9
 35                0.6                           3.3
 40                0.5                           4.0
 50                0.4                           5.0
 60                0.3                           6.7

0.2mL of this solution is drawn up into a syringe and given in one or both
nostrils, whilst the child’s head is tilted backwards. Turn the head to each
side, maintaining each position for several secs. A small syringe can be used
to drip the solution into the nose, but if possible use an aerosol device
(eg MAD®), allowing for the dead space of the device (0.1mL for MAD,
so draw up 0.3mL). Record the time of administration. Monitor conscious
level for 20min. Respiratory depression is unlikely, but resuscitation facili-
ties and naloxone must be available. Nasal diamorphine provides rapid
analgesia which lasts up to 4 hr.
Fentanyl may also be used nasally (initial dose 2micrograms/kg) as an
alternative to nasal diamorphine.
1 College of Emergency Medicine Clinical Effectiveness Committee (2009). Guideline for the
  management of pain in children. College of Emergency Medicine, London.
2 http://intranasal.net/PainControl/default.htm
282    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Local anaesthesia (LA)
      Indications for LA in the emergency department
      LA is indicated in any situation in which it will provide satisfactory analgesia
      or safe and adequate conditions for operations or procedures. These
      include the following:
      • Insertion of venous cannulae (0.1mL of 1% lidocaine SC 30 secs prior to
        cannulation d pain of cannulation without affecting the success rate).
      • Cleaning, exploration and suturing of many wounds.
      • Analgesia for some fractures, eg shaft of femur.
      • Minor operations/procedures, eg manipulation of some fractures and
        dislocations, insertion of chest drain, drainage of paronychia, removal of
        corneal FB.
      Contraindications to local anaesthetic
      • Refusal or poor co-operation by the patient.
      • Allergy to local anaesthetic Severe allergic reactions to LA are rare, but
        anaphylaxis can occur. If allergy to a LA is alleged, obtain full details of
        the circumstances and the drug involved and check with a senior before
        giving any LA. It may be possible to use a different drug. Some reactions
        are caused by the preservative in multi-dose vials, rather than the drug
        itself, so single dose ampoules may not cause a problem. Some alleged
        ‘allergies’ are actually toxic effects due to overdosage, or faints due to
        fear and pain.
      • Infection at the proposed injection site Injection into an inﬂamed area is
        painful and could spread infection. High tissue acidity from inﬂammation
        d effectiveness of LA drugs. Hyperaemia causes rapid removal of the
        drug and so a short duration of action and i risk of toxicity. LA nerve
        block at a site away from the infected area can provide good anaes-
        thesia, eg digital nerve block for paronychia or nerve blocks at the ankle
        for an abscess on the sole of the foot.
      • Bleeding disorder Anticoagulant therapy and thrombocytopenia are
        contraindications for nerve blocks in which there is a risk of inadvertent
        arterial puncture.
      Special cautions (i risk of toxicity)
      • Small children.
      • Elderly or debilitated.
      • Heart block.
      • Low cardiac output.
      • Epilepsy.
      • Myasthenia gravis.
      • Hepatic impairment.
      • Porphyria.
      • Anti-arrhythmic or B-blocker therapy (risk of myocardial depression).
      • Cimetidine therapy (inhibits metabolism of lidocaine).
                                              LOCAL ANAESTHESIA (LA)            283

Lidocaine (lignocaine)
Lidocaine is the LA used most often for local inﬁltration and for nerve
blocks. It is available in 0.5%, 1% and 2% solutions, either ‘plain’ (without
adrenaline) or with adrenaline 1:200,000. For routine use the most suitable
choice is 1% plain lidocaine.
Duration of action Lidocaine acts rapidly and the effects last from 30–60min
(for plain lidocaine) to 90min (lidocaine with adrenaline). The duration of
action varies with the dosage and the local circulation.
For plain lidocaine the maximum dose is 200mg (20mL of 1% solution) in a
healthy adult or 3mg/kg in a child.
For lidocaine with adrenaline the maximum dose is 500mg (50mL of 1%
solution) in a healthy adult or 7mg/kg in a child.
These are the maximum total doses for one or more injections of LA
given together for local inﬁltration or nerve block (with care to avoid
intravascular injection). Reduce the dose in debilitated or elderly patients,
or if there is a particular risk of toxicity (see opposite).
Lidocaine can also be used for anaesthesia of the skin (with prilocaine
in EMLA® cream, b p.288), urethra and cornea, and also as a spray for
anaesthetizing mucous membranes in the mouth and throat.
Bupivacaine
Bupivacaine is particularly useful for nerve blocks since it has a long
duration of action (3–8hr), although its onset of anaesthesia is slower
than lidocaine. It may also be used for local inﬁltration, but not for Bier's
block (b p.290). Bupivacaine is available in concentrations of 0.25 and
0.5% with or without adrenaline: the usual choice is 0.5% bupivacaine
without adrenaline. The maximum dose of bupivacaine (with or without
adrenaline) for a ﬁt adult is 150mg (30mL of 0.5% or 60mL of 0.25%) and
for a child 2mg/kg.
Prilocaine
Prilocaine has a similar duration of action to lidocaine. It can be used
for local inﬁltration or nerve blocks, but is particularly useful for Bier’s
block (b p.290). High doses (usually >600mg) may cause methaemoglo-
binaemia. The maximum dose of prilocaine for a healthy adult is 400mg
(40mL of 1% solution) and for a child 6mg/kg.
Tetracaine (amethocaine)
Tetracaine is used for topical local anaesthesia of the cornea (b p.535)
and skin (b p.288).
Proxymetacaine
Proxymetacaine is also used for topical local anaesthesia of the cornea.
It causes less initial stinging than tetracaine and is particularly useful in
children.
284    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Local anaesthetic toxicity
      Toxic effects
      These result from overdosage of LA or inadvertent intravascular injection.
      The ﬁrst symptoms and signs are usually neurological, with numbness of
      the mouth and tongue, slurring of speech, lightheadedness, tinnitus, con-
      fusion and drowsiness. Muscle twitching, convulsions and coma can occur.
      Cardiovascular toxicity may initially result in tachycardia and hypertension,
      but later there is hypotension with a bradycardia and heart block.
      Ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest occur occasionally, especially
      with bupivacaine.
      Early signs of toxicity
      These may be detected if the doctor maintains a conversation with
      the patient while injecting LA. Toxic effects may start immediately if an
      intravascular injection is given. However, peak blood levels usually occur
      810–25min after injection—so if a relatively large dose has been given, do
      not leave the patient alone while anaesthesia develops.
      Occasionally, patients initially agree to LA, but become hysterical or faint
      (even while lying ﬂat) when an injection is given. In such circumstances it
      may be difﬁcult to distinguish immediately between the effects of anxiety
      and those of drug toxicity.
      Treatment of LA toxicity
      • Stop the procedure.
      • Call for help.
      • Clear and maintain the airway.
      • Give 100% O2 and ensure adequate lung ventilation.
      • Obtain reliable IV access. If possible take blood for U&E.
      • Monitor ECG. Record pulse, BP, respiratory rate and conscious level.
      • If convulsions occur ensure adequate oxygenation and give lorazepam
        (adult dose 2–4mg slowly IV; child: 100micrograms/kg, max 4mg) or
        diazepam (adult 5–10mg slowly IV; child 100micrograms/kg).
      • Treat hypotension by raising the foot of the trolley. If systolic BP
        remains <90mmHg in an adult, give IV ﬂuids (eg colloid 500mL). In a
        child give 20mL/kg if systolic BP <70mmHg.
      • Bradycardia usually resolves without treatment. If bradycardia and
        hypotension persist give atropine and consider IV lipid emulsion.
      • In cardiac arrest due to LA toxicity, give lipid emulsion using Intralipid®
        20% 1.5mL/kg IV over 1min (bolus of 100mL for 70kg patient) then
        15mL/kg/hr (500mL over 30min for 70kg patient). Continue CPR. If
        circulation is still inadequate repeat IV bolus of Intralipid twice at 5min
        intervals then IVI 30mL/kg/hr (500mL over 15min). Maximum total dose
        of 20% lipid emulsion is 12mL/kg).
      • See b p.187 and http://www.aagbi.org/publications/guidelines/docs/
        la_toxicity_2010.pdf
                                       LOCAL ANAESTHETIC TOXICITY                285

Adrenaline (epinephrine) in local anaesthesia
Most local anaesthetics cause vasodilatation, so adrenaline is sometimes
added as a vasoconstrictor. This d blood loss, i duration of anaesthesia
and d toxicity by delaying absorption of the LA. Lidocaine with adrenaline
is often useful in scalp wounds, in which bleeding can be profuse but the
bleeding point is not visible.
Bupivacaine with adrenaline is recommended for intercostal nerve block to
d risk of toxicity from rapid absorption in a relatively vascular area.
Lidocaine with adrenaline can be used in some situations (see below for
contraindications) if a relatively large volume of LA is needed, since the
max dose for a healthy adult is 500mg (50mL of 1% solution) compared to
200mg (20mL of 1%) for plain lidocaine. Other possibilities in such circum-
stances include 0.5% lidocaine, prilocaine (max dose: 40mL of 1% solution)
or GA.
The maximum concentration of adrenaline in LA is 1 in 200,000, except for
dental anaesthesia in which 1 in 80,000 may be used. The maximum total
dose of adrenaline in a healthy adult is 500micrograms.
Contraindications and cautions
Never use adrenaline for injections in the nose, ears, or penis, nor in Bier's
block (b p.290). Avoid adrenaline for injections in or near ﬂap lacera-
tions, since vasoconstriction could cause ischaemic necrosis. Adrenaline
is traditionally regarded as dangerous in digital nerve blocks of ﬁngers and
toes, because of the risk of ischaemia, but some hand surgeons have used
LA with adrenaline uneventfully to reduce bleeding and avoid the need
for a ﬁnger tourniquet However, LA without adrenaline is advisable for
routine use in ﬁngers and toes, to avoid concerns about ischaemia.
Avoid adrenaline in:
• Ischaemic heart disease.
• Hypertension.
• Peripheral vascular disease.
• Thyrotoxicosis.
• Phaeochromocytoma.
• Patients on beta-blockers.
The BNF states that LA with adrenaline appears to be safe in patients on
tricyclic antidepressants.
Storage Keep ampoules and vials of LA with adrenaline in a locked
cupboard separate from those without adrenaline, so that they are
only available by special request and are not used inadvertently or
inappropriately.
286    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      General principles of local anaesthesia
      Obtain a brief medical history and record drug treatment and allergies.
      Think about possible contraindications and cautions for LA (b p.282).
      Obtain expert advice if you have any query.
      Consent for local anaesthetic
      Explain to the patient what is planned. Verbal consent is adequate for
      most LA procedures in the ED.
      Written consent is needed:
      • If there is a signiﬁcant risk of a toxic reaction or complication, including
        procedures needing large doses of LA.
      • Bier's block (b p.290).
      • Intercostal nerve block (risk of pneumothorax).
      Safety
      Ensure that resuscitation equipment and drugs for toxic reactions are
      readily available. Monitoring and IV access are not needed for routine
      simple LA, but are essential if there is a risk of complications or toxicity.
      Calculate the maximum dose of LA that could be used (b p.283) and
      think how much might be needed. Before drawing up any LA check the
      drug label carefully, especially if adrenaline is contraindicated.
      Giving local anaesthetic
      • Lie the patient down in a comfortable position with the site of injec-
        tion accessible and supported. Some patients faint if LA is injected while
        they are sitting up.
      • Warm the LA to body temperature prior to use.
      • Wash your hands, use gloves, and clean the skin.
      • Use a ﬁne needle if possible. Before inserting the needle warn the
        patient and hold the relevant part ﬁrmly to prevent movement.
      • Aspirate and check for blood in the syringe before injecting any LA.
        If the needle moves, aspirate again.
      • Inject LA slowly to d pain. Do not use force if there is resistance to
        injection.
      • Maintain a conversation with the patient, to allay anxieties and also to
        detect any early signs of toxicity (b p.284).
      Further details of techniques and precautions are listed on other pages:
      Topical anaesthesia: b p.288.
      Local inﬁltration and ﬁeld blocks: b p.289.
      Haematoma block for fractures: b p.289.
      Bier’s block (IV regional anaesthesia): b p.290.
      Nerve blocks: b pp.292–306.
      Recording the local anaesthetic
      Write clearly in the notes to record the time and site of injection and the
      type and quantity of LA given.
                       GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LOCAL ANAESTHESIA                  287

Local anaesthesia in children
The general principles are the same as for adults. LA is very useful in chil-
dren, but requires experienced staff. Many children tolerate LA without
any problem, but in some sedation with midazolam (b p.308) or keta-
mine (b p.278) can be helpful.
Weigh the child if possible and calculate the maximum dose of LA
(b p.283). In an average size child a simple initial estimate of the maximum
dose of 1% plain lidocaine is 1mL per year of age (ie 3mL for a 3-year-old
child). If a larger volume may be needed, consider using 0.5% solution or
lidocaine with adrenaline (b p.285), or possibly a GA instead.
Prepare everything before bringing the child into the room—rattling
equipment and drawing up LA within sight of a patient causes unnecessary
anxiety. Most parents prefer to stay with their child during the procedure
and this is often helpful. Position the child and parent comfortably. Explain
simply and honestly what is going to happen. Have adequate help to keep
the child still. Use a small needle if possible and inject slowly to minimize
pain from the injection.
288    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Topical anaesthesia
      LA applied directly to mucous membranes of the mouth, throat
      or urethra will diffuse through and block sensory nerve endings.
      Development of anaesthesia may take several minutes and the duration
      is relatively short because of the good blood supply. Over-dosage is
      dangerously easy because most topical preparations contain high
      concentrations of lidocaine (2% in lidocaine gel, 5% in ointment, and 4% or
      10% in lidocaine spray).
      Lidocaine gel has been used to allow cleaning of gravel burns, but this is
      not advisable: absorption of lidocaine can easily cause toxicity and the
      degree of anaesthesia is rarely satisfactory. Scrubbing is often necessary
      to remove embedded gravel, so proper anaesthesia is essential. Field
      block may be adequate for a small area, but GA is often necessary
      for cleaning large or multiple gravel burns, in order to avoid tattooing.
      Topical anaesthesia
      EMLA® cream
      ‘Eutectic mixture of local anaesthetics’ (EMLA®) cream contains lidocaine
      2.5% and prilocaine 2.5%, and is used for topical anaesthesia of the skin.
      EMLA® is of limited value in the ED because it must only be applied to
      intact skin (not wounds) and the onset of anaesthesia is slow, usually
      81 hour. EMLA® must not be used in children aged <1 year and caution is
      needed in patients with anaemia or methaemoglobinaemia.
      EMLA® can usefully d pain of an injection or cannulation. Apply a thick
      layer of EMLA® cream to the skin and cover it with an occlusive dressing,
      which must be left undisturbed for 1 hour.
      Tetracaine (amethocaine) gel (Ametop®)
      This is similar to EMLA®, but acts more quickly and causes vasodilatation,
      which aids venous cannulation. It must not be used in wounds because of
      the risk of rapid absorption and toxicity.
      Other topical LA agents
      Topical agents such as TAC (tetracaine, adrenaline, and cocaine) or LET
      (lidocaine, epinephrine and tetracaine) are sometimes used to provide
      anaesthesia for wound repair. These preparations can provide effective
      anaesthesia, but toxic effects may occur from excessive absorption (especially
      of cocaine) and they are not licensed in the UK.
      Ethyl chloride
      Ethyl chloride is a clear ﬂuid which boils at 12.5°C. Spraying the liquid on
      the skin causes rapid cooling and freezing of the surface. In the past ethyl
      chloride was used for incision of paronychias and small abscesses, but it
      rarely provides adequate anaesthesia and it cannot be recommended.
      Ethyl chloride is highly inﬂammable and is a GA, so it must be handled
      with care if it is used at all.
                              LOCAL ANAESTHETIC ADMINISTRATION                  289

Local anaesthetic administration
Local inﬁltration anaesthesia
Local inﬁltration is the technique used most often in the ED. The LA
injected subcutaneously in the immediate area of the wound acts within
1–2min. Anaesthesia lasts 30–60min with plain lidocaine or 890min with
lidocaine and adrenaline.
In clean wounds the pain of injection can often be d by inserting the
needle through the cut surface of the wound. Do not do this in dirty
or old wounds, because of the risk of spreading infection. Less pain is
produced by injecting slowly through a thin needle, injecting in a fan-
shaped area from a single injection site, and by inserting the needle in
an area already numbed by an earlier injection. Rapid injection of LA,
especially in scalp wounds, can cause spraying of solution from the tip
of the needle or from separation of the needle from the syringe. Slow
injection and the use of goggles should d risk of transmission of infection.
Field block
This involves inﬁltration of LA subcutaneously around the operative ﬁeld.
Sometimes it is only necessary to block one side of the area, depending
on the direction of the nerve supply. Field block can be useful for ragged
and dirty wounds, and for cleaning gravel abrasions. Check the max safe
dose before starting a ﬁeld block. If relatively large volumes of anaesthetic
might be needed, consider 0.5% lidocaine or lidocaine with adrenaline
(b p.285).
Haematoma block
A Colles’ fracture (b p.444) can be manipulated after inﬁltration of LA
into the fracture haematoma and around the ulnar styloid. This often pro-
vides less effective anaesthesia than Bier’s block (b p.290) and a poorer
reduction. It converts a closed fracture into an open one and so there is a
theoretical risk of infection, but in practice this is rare.
Contraindications and warnings
• Fractures >24 hours old (since organization of the haematoma would
  prevent spread of the LA).
• Infection of the skin over the fracture.
• Methaemoglobinaemia (avoid prilocaine).
Drug and dosage 15mL of 1% plain prilocaine. Lidocaine can be used,
but there is a lower margin of safety. Never use solutions containing
adrenaline.
Technique Use a 20mL syringe and 0.6 × 25mm needle. Full asepsis is
essential. Insert the needle into the fracture haematoma and aspirate
blood to conﬁrm this. Inject slowly to minimize pain and reduce the risk of
high blood levels and toxicity. Anaesthesia develops in 85min and lasts for
30–60min. Sometimes anaesthesia is inadequate for proper manipulation
and so an alternative anaesthetic is needed.
290    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Bier’s block
      Bier’s block (IV regional anaesthesia) is often used to provide anaesthesia
      for reduction of Colles’ fractures or for minor surgery below the elbow.
      Bier’s block uses a large dose of LA and so there is a risk of a toxic reaction,
      although this is minimized by correct technique. Ensure that the patient
      has fasted for 4 hours. Pre-operative assessment is necessary, including
      recording of BP and weight. Obtain written consent for the operation.
      Bier’s block should only be performed by doctors who are competent
      to deal with severe toxic reactions. At least two trained staff must be
      present throughout the procedure.
      Contraindications
      • Severe hypertension or obesity.
      • Severe peripheral vascular disease.
      • Raynaud’s syndrome.
      • Sickle cell disease or trait.
      • Methaemoglobinaemia.
      • Children aged <7 years.
      • Uncooperative or confused patient.
      • Procedures needed in both arms.
      • Surgery that may last >30min.
      • Surgery that may need the tourniquet to be released.
      Proceed with caution in epileptic patients because of the risk of a ﬁt from
      LA toxicity.
      Drug and dose
      The only drug suitable for Bier’s block is prilocaine, from a single dose
      vial without preservative. Never use solutions with adrenaline. Do not
      use lidocaine or bupivacaine, which are more likely than prilocaine to
      cause toxic effects. The ideal concentration of prilocaine is 0.5%. If only
      1% prilocaine is available dilute it with an equal volume of 0.9% saline to
      make 0.5% prilocaine.
      The dose of prilocaine is 3mg/kg, which is 42mL of 0.5% prilocaine for a
      70kg adult, or 30mL of 0.5 % prilocaine for a 50kg patient.
      Equipment
      • Special tourniquet apparatus is essential, with a 15cm wide cuff for
        adults.
      • Check the tourniquet apparatus and cuff regularly.
      • Ordinary BP cuffs and sphygmomanometers are not reliable enough,
        and should not be used for Bier’s blocks.
      • Check that resuscitation equipment and drugs are available to hand.
      • Ensure that the patient is on a tipping trolley.
      • Monitor the ECG, BP and SpO2 throughout.
                                                                              BIER’S BLOCK          291

Technique for Bier’s block1
• Insert a small IV cannula in the dorsum of the hand on the side of opera-
  tion (ready for injection of prilocaine) and another IV cannula in the
  opposite arm (for emergency use if needed).
• Check the radial pulse. Place the tourniquet high on the arm over
  padding, but do not inﬂate it yet.
• Elevate the arm for 3min while pressing over the brachial artery, to
  try to exsanguinate the limb. (Do not use an Esmarch bandage for this
  purpose, because of pain).
• While the arm is elevated inﬂate the tourniquet to 300mmHg, or at
  least 100mmHg above the systolic BP. Lower the arm on to a pillow and
  check that the tourniquet is not leaking.
• Record the tourniquet time. A trained person must observe the tourni-
  quet pressure constantly during the procedure.
• Slowly inject the correct volume of 0.5% plain prilocaine into the iso-
  lated limb, which will become mottled. If the operation is on the hand,
  squeeze the forearm during injection to direct LA peripherally. Test for
  anaesthesia after 5min. If anaesthesia is inadequate inject 10–15mL 0.9%
  saline to ﬂush the prilocaine into the arm. Occasionally, no adequate
  anaesthesia is achieved and GA is needed instead.
• Complete the manipulation or operation. Before applying a POP back
  slab remove the cannula from the injured arm.
• The tourniquet cuff must remain inﬂated for at least 20min and a
  maximum of 45min.
• Obtain a check X-ray while the tourniquet cuff is still inﬂated (in case
  remanipulation is required).
• If the check X-ray is satisfactory deﬂate the tourniquet slowly and
  record the time. Maintain a conversation with the patient and watch
  carefully for any sign of toxicity. If any toxic effects occur re-inﬂate the
  tourniquet and give any necessary treatment (b p.284).
• After release of the tourniquet the arm becomes warm and ﬂushed.
  Sensation returns after a few minutes.
• Observe the patient carefully for at least 30mins after a Bier’s block in
  case of delayed toxicity. Check the circulation of the limb before the
  patient is discharged home. Reactive swelling can occur: elevate the
  limb in a sling and give POP instructions.

1 College of Emergency Medicine Clinical Effectiveness Committee (2010) Intravenous regional
  anaesthesia for distal forearm fractures (Bier’s block). College of Emergency Medicine, London.
292    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Local anaesthetic nerve blocks
      LA nerve blocks are very useful in the ED for many minor operations
      and to provide analgesia. Several nerve blocks are described in the
      following sections. Many other nerve blocks and regional blocks are
      possible, but are not normally appropriate in the ED. Some should only
      be performed by doctors with anaesthetic training, or in a few cases,
      dental training.
      Equipment for nerve blocks
      Ordinary injection needles can be used for most local blocks in the ED.
      Anaesthetists sometimes use special pencil-point or short bevel needles
      when blocking large nerve trunks and plexuses.
      General procedure for nerve blocks
      • Follow the general principles of LA (b p.282).
      • Review the relevant anatomy for the block. Determine the site of injec-
        tion by feeling for local structures such as arteries or tendons.
      • When performing a nerve block hold the needle with the bevel in the
        line of the nerve (rather than across it), to reduce the risk of cutting
        nerve ﬁbres.
      • Ask the patient about tingling in the area supplied by the nerve. Do not
        try to elicit paraesthesiae. If paraesthesiae occur withdraw the needle
        2–3mm before injecting.
      • Wait for the nerve block to work, but do not leave the patient alone
        during this time. Tell the nurse when to call you back, in case you are
        busy with other patients. Estimate when a nerve block should be effec-
        tive and do not test sensation before then. Small nerves may be blocked
        in 5min, but large nerves may take up to 40min.
      Failed nerve block
      If a nerve block does not work, consider waiting longer or giving another
      injection. Before giving any more LA, review relevant anatomy, consider
      using ultrasound guidance, and check that the maximum safe dose of the
      drug will not be exceeded. Entonox® can be helpful as a supplement to
      LA for some procedures, such as reduction of dislocations. Alternatively,
      sedation (b p.308) may be useful in some cases. Occasionally, one has to
      abandon LA and arrange GA instead.
      Ultrasound guidance for nerve blocks1
      Ultrasound guidance can help in identifying nerves and other struc-
      tures and allows visualization of the needle position and the spread of
      LA. Precise injection of LA adjacent to a nerve gives a faster onset and
      longer duration of anaesthesia with a smaller volume of LA, less pain and a
      reduced risk of complications. Ultrasound is unnecessary for some nerve
      blocks, eg digital nerves and supraorbital nerve block. Ultrasound allows
      nerve blockade away from identifying structures, eg medial nerve block in
      the forearm.
      Successful use of ultrasound for LA requires appropriate equipment,
      knowledge of relevant anatomy, and training in ultrasound techniques.
      1 Marhofer P (2008) Ultrasound Guidance for Nerve Blocks. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
This page intentionally left blank
294    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Digital nerve block
      Digital nerve block is used frequently for simple operations on the ﬁngers
      and toes. (The term ‘ring block’ is often used, but is incorrect since it
      implies that LA is injected in a ring around the ﬁnger, which is unnecessary
      and might cause ischaemia due to vascular compression).
      A dorsal and a palmar digital nerve run along each side of the ﬁnger and
      thumb. Similarly, there are dorsal and plantar nerves in the toes.
      1% plain lidocaine is often used, but bupivacaine (0.5% plain) is preferable
      because it is less painful on injection, and gives prolonged anaesthesia and
      analgesia. The traditional advice is never to use adrenaline or any other
      vasoconstrictor. In an adult use 1–2mL of LA on each side of the ﬁnger,
      thumb, or big toe. Use smaller volumes in the other toes or in children.
      Technique
      • Use a 0.6 × 25 mm (23G) needle (0.5 × 16 mm, 25G, in small children).
      • Insert the needle from the dorsum on the lateral side of the base of the
        digit, angled slightly inwards towards the midline of the digit, until the
        needle can be felt under the skin on the ﬂexor aspect.
      • Aspirate to check the needle is not in a blood vessel.
      • Slowly inject 0.5–1mL. Continue injecting as the needle is withdrawn.
      • Repeat on the medial side of the digit.
      • If anaesthesia is needed for the nail bed of the great toe give an addi-
        tional injection of LA subcutaneously across the dorsum of the base
        of the proximal phalanx, to block the dorsal digital nerves and their
        branches. This is also required for anaesthesia of the dorsum of the digit
        proximal to the middle phalanx.
      Anaesthesia develops after 85min. Autonomic nerve ﬁbres are blocked,
      as well as sensory nerve ﬁbres, so when the block works the skin feels
      dry and warm. Occasionally, anaesthesia remains inadequate and another
      injection is needed. The maximum volume that can be used in a ﬁnger,
      thumb, or big toe is 5mL. Use less in the other toes or in children.
      Single injection digital nerve block
      Anaesthesia of the distal phalanx and DIP joint can be achieved by a single
      subcutaneous injection in the volar aspect of the base of the ﬁnger. Pinch
      the soft tissues just distal to the proximal skin crease. Insert a 25G needle
      just beneath the skin at the midpoint of the skin crease and inject 2–3mL
      of 0.5% bupivacaine. Massage the LA into the soft tissues.
      Digital nerve block at metacarpal level
      Digital nerves can be blocked where they run in the interspaces between
      the metacarpals. Insert a thin needle in the palm through the distal palmar
      crease, between the ﬂexor tendons of adjacent ﬁngers. Injection of 3–4mL
      of 1% plain lidocaine will block the adjacent sides of these two ﬁngers.
      Anaesthesia develops after 5–10min. Alternatively, a dorsal approach can
      be used: this is often preferred because it is less painful, but there is an i
      risk of inadvertent venepuncture and the digital nerves are further from
      the dorsal surface, so a deep injection is needed.
                                                      DIGITAL NERVE BLOCK   295

Digital nerve block
                                      Needle position

                                       3                1

                                                               2
                                                      Digital artery

                                      Digital nerve

                                           3    1

                    Digital nerve block at the base of the finger

                                Distal palmar
                                crease

                                                       Site of injection

                      Digital nerve block at metacarpal level
Fig. 7.1 Digital nerve block.
296    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Nerve blocks at the wrist: 1
      The median nerve supplies sensation to the radial half of the palm, the thumb,
      index and middle ﬁnger, and the radial side of the ring ﬁnger. The ulnar nerve
      supplies the ulnar side of the hand, the little ﬁnger, and the ulnar side of the
      ring ﬁnger. The radial nerve supplies the dorsum of the radial side of the
      hand. The different nerve distributions overlap. In some people, the radial
      side of the ring ﬁnger and the ulnar side of the middle ﬁnger are supplied by
      the ulnar, rather than median nerve. LA block of one or more nerves at the
      wrist provides good anaesthesia for minor surgery on the hand and ﬁngers.
      Median nerve block
      At the wrist the median nerve lies under the ﬂexor retinaculum on the
      anterior aspect of the wrist, under or immediately radial to the tendon of
      palmaris longus and 5–10mm medial to the tendon of ﬂexor carpi radialis.
      Just proximal to the ﬂexor retinaculum, the median nerve gives off the
      palmar cutaneous branch, which travels superﬁcially to supply the skin of
      the thenar eminence and the central palm.
      Carpal tunnel syndrome is a contraindication to median nerve block.
      Technique
      • Use a 0. 6mm (23G) needle and 85–10mL of 1% lidocaine.
      • Ask the patient to ﬂex the wrist slightly and bend the thumb to touch
        the little ﬁnger, in order to identify palmaris longus.
      • Insert the needle vertically at the proximal wrist skin crease, between
        palmaris longus and ﬂexor carpi radialis, angled slightly towards palmaris
        longus, to a depth of 1 cm. If paraesthesiae occur withdraw the needle
        by 2–3 mm.
      • Inject 85mL of LA slowly.
      • Block the palmar cutaneous branch by injecting another 1–2mL SC
        while withdrawing the needle.
      • Some people do not have a palmaris longus tendon—in this case,
        identify ﬂexor carpi radialis and insert the needle on its ulnar side.
      • Ultrasound allows blockade of the median nerve in the forearm.
      Ulnar nerve block
      In the distal forearm the ulnar nerve divides into a palmar branch (which
      travels with the ulnar artery to supply the hypothenar eminence and palm)
      and a dorsal branch (which passes under ﬂexor carpi ulnaris to supply the
      ulnar side of the dorsum of the hand).
      Technique
      • Use a 0.6mm (23G) needle and 5–10mL of 1% lidocaine. Avoid
        adrenaline in peripheral vascular disease.
      • Check the radial pulse before blocking the ulnar nerve.
      • Feel the ulnar artery and ﬂexor carpi ulnaris tendon and insert the
        needle between them at the level of the ulnar styloid process.
      • Aspirate and look for blood in the syringe. Withdraw the needle 2–3mm
        if paraesthesiae occur.
      • Inject 5mL of LA.
      • Block the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve by SC inﬁltration of 3–5mL
        of LA from ﬂexor carpi ulnaris around the ulnar border of the wrist.
                                            NERVE BLOCKS AT THE WRIST: 1   297

Nerve blocks at the wrist

                                          Radial nerve
                                          Median nerve
                                          Ulnar nerve

                       Median nerve
                  Flexor carpi radialis             Palmaris
                                                    longus

                                                    Ulnar nerve
                                 Ulnar artery       Flexor carpi ulnaris
Fig. 7.2 Nerve blocks at the wrist.
298    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Nerve blocks at the wrist: 2
      Radial nerve block
      In the distal part of the forearm the radial nerve passes under the tendon
      of brachioradialis and lies subcutaneously on the dorsum of the radial side
      of the wrist, where it separates into several branches and supplies the
      radial side of the dorsum of the hand.
      Technique
      • Use a 0.6mm (23G) needle and 5mL of 1% lidocaine, with or without
        adrenaline.
      • Inﬁltrate LA subcutaneously around the radial side and dorsum of the
        wrist from the tendon of ﬂexor carpi radialis to the radio-ulnar joint.
        Beware of inadvertent IV injection.
      Radial nerve block involves an inﬁltration technique and often has a
      more rapid onset and shorter duration of action than median nerve and
      ulnar nerve blocks. In combined blocks, experts may use lidocaine with
      adrenaline in order to prolong the anaesthetic and d the risk of lidocaine
      toxicity.
      Other nerve blocks in the arm
      Nerve blocks at the elbow The median, ulnar, and radial nerves can be
      blocked at the level of the elbow, but this is rarely necessary. The onset
      of anaesthesia is slower than with blocks at the wrist.
      Brachial plexus blocks These should only be used by doctors with
      anaesthetic training. Brachial plexus blocks can provide good anaesthesia
      for operations on the arm but the onset of anaesthesia is often slow
      (30–45min) and there is a risk of LA toxicity because of the large
      dose required. The axillary approach can be used in outpatients. If the
      supraclavicular approach is used, admission to hospital is necessary,
      because of the risk of a pneumothorax. Ultrasound guidance helps to
      allow accurate positioning of the injection, which improves the effective-
      ness of the block and reduces the risk of complications.
                                            NERVE BLOCKS AT THE WRIST: 2   299

Radial nerve block at the wrist

                                                           Radial nerve
Fig. 7.3 Radial nerve block at the wrist.
300    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Nerve blocks of forehead and ear
      Nerve blocks of the forehead
      Many wounds of the forehead and frontal region of the scalp can be
      explored and repaired conveniently under LA block of the supraorbital
      and supratrochlear nerves.
      The supraorbital nerve divides into medial and lateral branches, and leaves
      the orbit through two holes or notches in the superior orbital margin,
      82.5 cm from the midline. The branches of the supraorbital nerve supply
      sensation to most of the forehead and the frontal region of the scalp.
      The supratrochlear nerve emerges from the upper medial corner of the
      orbit and supplies sensation to the medial part of the forehead.
      Technique
      • Use 5–10mL of 1% lidocaine, with or without adrenaline.
      • Insert the needle in the midline between the eyebrows and direct it
        laterally.
      • Inject LA subcutaneously from the point of insertion along the upper
        margin of the eyebrow.
      • If the wound extends into the lateral part of the forehead SC inﬁltration
        of LA may be needed lateral to the eyebrow to block the zygomatico-
        temporal and auriculotemporal nerves.
      Possible complications
      • Injury to the eye can occur if the patient moves during the injection.
      • It is possible to block the supraorbital nerve at the supraorbital foramen,
        but this is not advisable since inadvertent injection into the orbit may
        cause temporary blindness if the LA reaches the optic nerve.
      Nerve blocks of the ear
      The auricle (pinna) of the ear is supplied by branches of the greater
      auricular nerve (from inferiorly), lesser occipital nerve (posteriorly), and
      the auriculotemporal nerve (anteriorly/superiorly). These nerves can
      be blocked by SC inﬁltration of up to 10mL of 1% plain lidocaine in the
      appropriate area, or in a ring around the ear.
      To block the greater auricular nerve inﬁltrate 1cm below the ear lobe from
      the posterior border of the sternomastoid muscle to the angle of the
      mandible.
      Block the lesser occipital nerve by inﬁltration just behind the ear.
      When blocking the auriculotemporal nerve by inﬁltration just anterior
      to the external auditory meatus, aspirate carefully to avoid inadvertent
      injection into the superﬁcial temporal artery.
                                NERVE BLOCKS OF FOREHEAD AND EAR                301

Nerve blocks: forehead and ear
                                Supraorbital nerve

                                                 Supratrochlear
                                                     nerve

  Auriculotemporal
  nerve
                                                                  Superficial
  Lesser occipital                                                temporal
  nerve                                                           artery

                                                 Greater auricular nerve
Fig. 7.4 Nerve blocks of the forehead and ear.
302    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Dental anaesthesia
      Intraoral injections of local anaesthetic are used frequently for dental pro-
      cedures, but can also be useful for cleaning and repair of wounds of the
      lips, cheeks, and chin. Instruction by a dentist or oral surgeon is required.
      Give dental anaesthetics with dental syringes and cartridges of LA. An
      appropriate drug for most purposes is lidocaine 2% with adrenaline 1 in
      80,000. Some dental syringes do not allow aspiration prior to injection.
      Disposable dental syringes are preferable to reusable syringes, to d risk of
      needlestick injury from resheathing of needles.
      Infra-orbital nerve block
      The infra-orbital nerve supplies the skin and mucous membrane of the
      cheek and upper lip, and also the lower eyelid and the side of the nose.
      The nerve emerges from the infra-orbital foramen, which is 0.5cm below
      the infra-orbital margin and vertically below the pupil when the eyes are
      looking forwards. The nerve can be blocked at the infra-orbital foramen
      by injection through the skin, but the intraoral approach is preferable,
      because it is less unpleasant for the patient. Insert the needle into the
      buccogingival fold between the ﬁrst and second premolars, and direct it
      up towards the infra-orbital foramen.
      Mental nerve block
      The mental nerve supplies sensation to the lower lip and the chin. It
      emerges from the mental foramen, which is palpable on the mandible on
      a line between the ﬁrst and second premolar teeth. The nerve can be
      blocked at the mental foramen with 1–2mL of LA, using either an intra- or
      extra-oral approach. Avoid injecting into the mental canal, since this may
      damage the nerve. If the wound to be repaired extends across the midline
      bilateral mental nerve blocks will be needed.
      The nerves to a single lower incisor may be blocked by submucous
      inﬁltration of LA in the buccal sulcus adjacent to the tooth.
                                        INTERCOSTAL NERVE BLOCK             303

Intercostal nerve block
Intercostal nerve blocks can give useful analgesia for patients with rib
fractures who are admitted to hospital, but it is not a routine procedure
and requires training and experience. These blocks must not be used in
outpatients and should not be performed bilaterally because of the risk
of pneumothorax. Patients with obesity or severe obstructive airways
disease have i risk of complications. Alternative procedures used in
ICU are interpleural analgesia and thoracic epidurals, but these are not
appropriate in the ED.
304    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Femoral nerve block
      Femoral nerve block is a simple technique and provides good analgesia
      within a few minutes for pain from a fractured shaft of femur. It may be
      used in children, as well as in adults. Perform femoral block on the clinical
      diagnosis of a fractured shaft of femur, before X-ray or the application of
      a traction splint.
      Femoral nerve block can be used with a block of the lateral cutaneous
      nerve of the thigh for anaesthetizing a skin donor site.
      Anatomy
      The femoral nerve passes under the inguinal ligament, where it lies lateral
      to the femoral artery. The femoral nerve supplies the hip and knee joints,
      the skin of the medial and anterior aspects of the thigh, and the quadri-
      ceps, sartorius and pectineus muscles in the anterior compartment of the
      thigh.
      Technique
      • Use a mixture of lidocaine and bupivacaine to give both rapid onset and
        prolonged anaesthesia. In an adult give 5mL of 1% lidocaine and 5mL of
        0.5% bupivacaine. In a child use 0.1mL/kg of 1% lidocaine and 0.1mL/kg
        of 0.5% bupivacaine. Check the maximum dose carefully, especially in
        children or if bilateral femoral nerve blocks are needed.
      • Use a 0.8 × 40 mm (21G) needle in adults and a 0.6 × 25 mm (23G)
        needle in children.
      • Blocking the right femoral nerve is best performed from the patient’s
        left side (and vice versa).
      • Using your non-dominant hand palpate the femoral artery just below
        the inguinal ligament.
      • Clean the skin.
      • Insert the needle perpendicular to the skin and 1cm lateral to the
        artery to a depth of 83cm. If paraesthesiae occurs, withdraw the needle
        2–3mm.
      • Aspirate and check for blood.
      • Inject LA while moving the needle up and down and fanning out later-
        ally to 83cm from the artery. (The distances quoted refer to adults.)
      • If the femoral artery is punctured compress it for 5–10min. If no bleeding
        is apparent, continue with the femoral nerve block.
      • This ‘blind’ technique for femoral nerve block has a high success rate
        and usually provides rapid and effective analgesia. However, ultrasound
        (b p.292) can be helpful to delineate the anatomy of the femoral nerve
        (which can vary between patients) and to allow precise positioning of
        the injection adjacent to the nerve.
                                                  FEMORAL NERVE BLOCK    305

Femoral nerve block
                  Anterior superior iliac spine

                  Femoral nerve
                   Femoral artery
                     Femoral vein

                                                        Femoral artery

Fig. 7.5 Femoral nerve block.
306    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Nerve blocks at the ankle
      Indications
      • Cleaning, exploration and suturing of wounds of the foot.
      • Removal of FB. Drainage of small abscesses on the sole of the foot.
      • Analgesia for crush injuries of the forefoot.
      • LA blocks at the ankle are particularly useful for anaesthetizing the sole
        of the foot, where local inﬁltration is very painful and unsatisfactory.
      Anatomy
      Sensation in the ankle and foot is supplied by 5 main nerves:
      • Saphenous nerve (medial side of ankle).
      • Superﬁcial peroneal nerve (front of ankle and dorsum of foot).
      • Deep peroneal nerve (lateral side of big toe and medial side of
        2nd toe).
      • Sural nerve (heel and lateral side of hind foot).
      • Tibial nerve (which forms the medial and lateral plantar nerves,
        supplying the anterior half of the sole).
      There are individual variations and signiﬁcant overlap between the areas
      supplied by different nerves, especially on the sole of the foot. It is often
      necessary to block more than one nerve.
      For each of these blocks use a 0.6mm (23G) needle and 5mL of 1%
      lidocaine (with or without adrenaline) or 0.5% bupivacaine. Check the
      maximum dose (b p.283), especially for multiple blocks. Ultrasound can
      help to allow accurate injection of LA, so smaller amounts are needed.
      Do not use adrenaline in patients with peripheral vascular disease.
      Saphenous nerve
      Inﬁltrate LA subcutaneously around the great saphenous vein, anterior to
      and just above the medial malleolus. Aspirate carefully because of the risk
      of IV injection.
      Superﬁcial peroneal nerve
      Inﬁltrate LA subcutaneously above the ankle joint from the anterior
      border of the tibia to the lateral malleolus.
      Deep peroneal nerve
      Insert the needle above the ankle joint between the tendons of tibialis
      anterior and extensor hallucis longus. Inject 5mL of LA.
      Sural nerve
      Lie the patient prone. Insert the needle lateral to the Achilles tendon and
      inﬁltrate subcutaneously to the lateral malleolus.
      Tibial nerve
      Lie the patient prone. Palpate the posterior tibial artery. Insert the needle
      medial to the Achilles tendon and level with the upper border of the
      medial malleolus, so the needle tip is just lateral to the artery. Withdraw
      slightly if paraesthesiae occur. Aspirate. Inject 5–10mL.
                                           NERVE BLOCKS AT THE ANKLE         307

Nerve blocks at the ankle

                                 Sural nerve
                                 Medial plantar nerve
                                 Lateral plantar nerve

                                          Sural nerve

                            Tendo Achilles
                                                         Lateral malleolus

                        Posterior tibial artery Tibial nerve

                   Medial malleolus

                                                          Tendo Achilles

Fig. 7.6 Nerve blocks at the ankle.
308    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Sedation
      Sedation is often used in the ED to help patients tolerate distressing
      procedures, such as reduction of dislocations. It carries the same risks
      and complications as GA. When appropriate, sedation may be used with
      an analgesic or LA, but do not use sedation as a substitute for adequate
      analgesia or anaesthesia. Sedative drugs may be given PO, IM, IV, or by
      inhalation. Oral sedation may be helpful in children. Inhalational sedation
      and analgesia with nitrous oxide (Entonox®, b p.278) is rapidly revers-
      ible, relatively risk-free, and can be used when appropriate in adults and
      some children. IV sedation of children is particularly hazardous because of
      the narrow margin between sedation and anaesthesia, so it should only be
      performed in the ED by staff with speciﬁc training.
      Risk assessment Main risks of sedation are respiratory depression,
      d cardiac output and inhalation of gastric contents. Patients at i risk of
      respiratory or cardiac complications include elderly, obese and those
      with pre-existing heart/lung disease. Patients with renal or hepatic disease
      may require d drug dosage. Ideally, patients should be fasted before IV
      sedation. Ask about and record pre-existing medical conditions, drug
      therapy, allergies, and time of last food and drink. Record pulse and BP. If
      there is any uncertainty, postpone the procedure or get expert help.
      Equipment Use a trolley which can be tilted head-down. Ensure
      suction, resuscitation equipment and drugs are immediately available.
      Staff Sedation should only be given by doctors trained in resuscitation.
      A second person (doctor or nurse) must be present throughout to assist.
      Some sedatives cause amnesia and transient confusion—the presence of a
      chaperone may avoid difﬁculties if there is any allegation of impropriety.
      Drugs for IV sedation All sedative drugs will produce anaesthesia if
      given in excessive dosage. Use the minimum dose that will give adequate
      sedation and allow the procedure to be completed satisfactorily.
      Midazolam is the most suitable benzodiazepine. It has a plasma half-life
      of about 2hr in young adults (longer in elderly or obese) and metabolites
      are relatively inactive. There are three concentrations (1, 2, and 5mg/mL)
      which are easily confused. In ﬁt adults initial dose of midazolam is 2mg IV
      over 1min. If sedation is inadequate after 2min, give incremental doses
      of 0.5–1mg (0.25–0.5mL of 10mg/5mL solution). When fully sedated, the
      patient will be drowsy with slurred speech, but will obey commands. The
      usual dose range is 2.5–7.5mg. Elderly patients are more susceptible to
      benzodiazepines—give smaller doses. Give 0.5–1mg as an initial dose: the
      total dose needed is usually 1–3mg.
      Diazepam is not suitable for IV sedation of outpatients, since it has a prolonged
      action and an active metabolite with a plasma half-life of 83–5 days.
      Opioids such as morphine (b p.276) may be used IV combined with
      midazolam, but there may be a synergistic effect with i risk of respiratory
      depression. Give the opioid ﬁrst in d dosage, followed by careful titration
      of midazolam.
      Other drugs Propofol (b p.316) can give excellent sedation for short
      procedures, with rapid recovery, but its use requires anaesthetic training.
      Ketamine (b p.278) may be given IV or IM, but requires special training.
                                                              SEDATION         309

Monitoring during IV sedation
Ensure patients given IV sedation receive O2, pulse oximetry monitoring
and have a venous cannula. Monitor ECG.
Antagonists
The speciﬁc antagonists ﬂumazenil (for benzodiazepines) and naloxone
(for opioids) must be available immediately, but should be needed very
rarely. If respiratory depression occurs, standard techniques to maintain
the airway and breathing are more important than giving antagonists.
Flumazenil and naloxone have shorter durations of action than the drugs
they antagonize, so careful observation is essential if either drug is used.
Recovery and discharge after sedation
If IV sedation is used, monitor the patient carefully until recovery is
complete.
Monitoring and resuscitation equipment and drugs must be available.
Minimum criteria for discharging a patient are:
• Stable vital signs.
• Ability to walk without support.
• Toleration of oral ﬂuids and minimal nausea.
• Adequate analgesia.
• Adequate supervision at home by a responsible adult.
Instruct the patient (both verbally and in writing) not to drive, operate
machinery, make any important decisions or drink alcohol for 24 hours.
Arrange appropriate follow-up. Ensure the adult accompanying the patient
knows who to contact if there is any problem.
Sedation in children
Many children (and their parents and staff) are distressed by proce-
dures such as suturing of minor wounds under LA. Sedation is helpful
to prevent distress and allows procedures to take place with minimal
physical restraint. Sedation may be given by oral or nasal routes, IM or
IV. Paediatric IV sedation requires anaesthetic experience because of the
narrow therapeutic margin between sedation and anaesthesia.
Ketamine given IM in a dose of 2–2.5mg/kg is currently the method of
choice for paediatric sedation in the ED by doctors with appropriate
training (b p.278). This dose of ketamine does not provide full
anaesthesia and so local anaesthesia is required for cleaning and suturing
of wounds.
Oral midazolam is advocated by some specialists. Oral sedation with
promethazine is not advisable, since it is often ineffective.
310    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      General anaesthesia in the emergency
      department
      GA may be needed in the ED for many different conditions:
      • Minor surgery (eg drainage of abscesses, manipulation of fractures).
      • Cardioversion.
      • Airway problems (eg facial trauma, burns, epiglottitis).
      • Respiratory failure (eg asthma, chronic obstructive airways disease,
        pulmonary oedema, chest injuries).
      • To protect the airway and control ventilation after head injuries and to
        keep the patient immobile for a CT scan.
      • To protect the airway and maintain ventilation in status epilepticus
        unresponsive to standard drug therapy.
      • Immediate major surgery (eg thoracotomy or laparotomy for trauma,
        ruptured ectopic pregnancy or aortic aneurysm). If at all possible take
        the patient to the operating theatre before anaesthesia, as the loss of
        sympathetic tone after the onset of anaesthesia can cause catastrophic
        hypotension in a hypovolaemic patient. In extreme emergencies, it may
        be necessary to operate in the ED.
      GA in the ED tends to be stressful for the anaesthetist and potentially
      hazardous for the patient, who is usually unprepared for anaesthesia, with
      a full stomach and increased risk of aspiration. GA should only be given
      by doctors with anaesthetic training, but other staff should know what is
      required so they can help when necessary.
      Pre-operative assessment
      This is essential for safe anaesthesia. If time allows, assess the patient
      before contacting the anaesthetist to arrange the anaesthetic. However, if
      emergency anaesthesia is needed, call the anaesthetist immediately so that
      he/she can come and assess the patient, and get senior help if necessary.
      A checklist of questions to ask before GA is shown opposite.
      Fitness for GA The American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) classiﬁ-
      cation of pre-operative ﬁtness is widely used by anaesthetists:
      1 Healthy patient with no systemic disease.
      2 Patient with a mild to moderate disease which does not limit their
         activity in any way (eg treated hypertension, mild diabetes, smoker).
      3 Patient with a severe systemic disturbance from any cause which limits
         activity (eg IHD with d exercise tolerance, severe COPD).
      4 Patient with a severe systemic disease which is a constant threat to life
         (eg severe chronic bronchitis, advanced liver disease).
      5 Moribund patient who is unlikely to survive 24 hours with or without
         treatment.
      The risk of complications from GA correlates well with ASA group. Only
      patients in ASA groups 1 and 2 should be given an elective anaesthetic
      by a junior anaesthetist in the ED. Children aged <7 years should not
      usually have a GA in the ED, except in an emergency.
         GENERAL ANAESTHESIA IN THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT                        311

Pre-operative investigations
No investigation except ‘dipstick’ urinalysis is needed, unless pre-operative
assessment reveals a problem. Measure Hb in any patient who appears
anaemic. Check for sickle cell disease in any patient of Afro-Caribbean,
Cypriot or Indian origin. Measure U&E in patients on diuretics, and blood
glucose in diabetics. ECG and CXR are not needed, unless clinically
indicated. Perform a pregnancy test if pregnancy is possible.
Checklist for pre-operative assessment in the ED
• Age.                              • Airway problem?
• Weight.                           • Dentures/crowns/loose teeth?
• Time of last drink.               • Chest disease?
• Time of last food.                • Smoker?
• Drugs.                            • Cardiac disease?
• Drugs given in the ED.            • Blood pressure.
• Time of last analgesia.           • GI problem?
• Allergies.                        • Other illness?
• Sickle cell risk?                 • Possibility of pregnancy?
• Infection risk?                   • Previous GA? (problems?)
• Family history of GA problems? • Consent form signed?
• Is the patient expected to go home after recovery from anaesthetic?
• Is there a responsible adult who can look after the patient at home?
Preparation for GA
Ideally, the patient should have nothing to drink for 4 hours and no food
for 6 hours before anaesthesia. Explain why this is necessary. Fasting does
not guarantee an empty stomach. Trauma, pregnancy and opioids delay
gastric emptying.
If the patient is in pain, give analgesia and an antiemetic. Discuss with
the anaesthetist any other drug treatment that is required. Patients with
a hiatus hernia or gastro-oesophageal reﬂux need antacid prophylaxis
(eg ranitidine 50mg IV and an antacid).
Explain the proposed operation and anaesthetic to the patient (and
relatives if appropriate) and ensure valid consent is obtained. The patient
must be clearly labelled with a wrist-band. Remove contact lenses, false
teeth and dental plates.
Recovery and discharge after anaesthesia
When the operation has ﬁnished, place the patient in the recovery posi-
tion and ensure continuous observation by trained staff until recovery is
complete. The anaesthetist should stay with the patient until conscious-
ness is regained and the airway is controlled. Monitoring and resuscitation
equipment and drugs must be available. The minimum criteria for dis-
charging a patient are the same as following sedation (b p.309).
Importantly, tell the patient (both verbally and in writing) not to drive,
operate machinery, make any important decisions or drink alcohol for
24 hours. Arrange appropriate follow-up and make sure that the adult
accompanying the patient knows who to contact if there is a problem.
312    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Emergency anaesthesia and rapid
      sequence induction
      Emergency anaesthesia and intubation are often needed to protect the
      airway and provide adequate ventilation in a patient with a head injury or
      multiple trauma. There is a high risk of aspiration of gastric contents into
      the lungs, so use a cuffed ET tube (uncuffed in small children). In a patient
      with a gag reﬂex any attempt to intubate without anaesthesia may cause
      vomiting and aspiration. Anaesthesia before intubation is essential in head-
      injured patients to minimize the i in ICP.
      Rapid sequence induction (RSI)
      RSI involves administration of a sedative or induction agent virtually
      simultaneously with a neuromuscular blocking agent to allow rapid
      tracheal intubation. RSI should only be performed by staff who have had
      speciﬁc training and experience in the techniques and the drugs used, and the
      recognition and management of possible problems. However, it is useful if
      ED staff who have not had such training understand the principles of RSI,
      so that they can assist as needed.
      • Call for senior ED/anaesthetic/ICU help.
      • Check all drugs and equipment, including suction, bag and masks,
         laryngoscope (and spare with large blade), tracheal tubes and introducers,
         syringe and valve or clamp for ET tube cuff, connectors.
      • Check that the trolley can be tilted head-down easily.
      • Check monitoring equipment (ECG, BP, pulse oximeter, end-tidal CO2
         monitor).
      • Explain the procedure to the patient if possible.
      • Assess the risks and any conditions which might cause problems with
         intubation (eg trauma to the face or neck, d mouth opening, receding
         chin). Identify a back-up plan (b p.314) and communicate this to the
         team.
      • Establish monitoring (ECG and pulse oximetry) and secure IV access.
      • Protect the cervical spine in all trauma patients: an assistant should
         provide in-line immobilization during intubation. In other patients, use a
         pillow and position the head and neck to aid intubation.
      • If possible, pre-oxygenate for 3min with 100% O2 via a tight-ﬁtting mask,
         with the patient breathing spontaneously. If breathing is inadequate,
         ventilate for 2min on 100% O2 with a bag and mask, with an assistant
         applying cricoid pressure by pressing ﬁrmly downwards with a thumb
         and index ﬁnger on the cricoid cartilage, while supporting the patient’s
         neck with the other hand.
      • Give an induction agent (eg thiopental or etomidate) quickly to provide
         rapid anaesthesia. Cricoid pressure must be maintained continuously
         until the airway is secure.
      • Follow the induction agent immediately with a muscle relaxant (usually
         suxamethonium).
      • Keep the face mask tightly applied until the anaesthetic and relaxant are
         effective. Then intubate and inﬂate the cuff quickly.
   EMERGENCY ANAESTHESIA AND RAPID SEQUENCE INDUCTION                       313

• Try to conﬁrm tracheal placement of the tube: ideally it will have
  been seen passing through the cords, but this may not be possible in an
  emergency intubation. Check air entry in both sides of the chest. Check
  end-tidal CO2 (but this may be misleading if oesophageal intubation
  occurs in a patient who has recently consumed antacids or ﬁzzy drinks).
  If CO2 is not detected, oesophageal intubation has occurred.
• Cricoid pressure can be released when the ET tube is correctly
  positioned, the cuff has been inﬂated and ventilation is satisfactory.
• Secure the tracheal tube.
• Continue observation and monitoring.
314    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      Difﬁcult intubation
      Difﬁculties with intubation may result from problems with the equipment,
      the patient, the circumstances of intubation, and from lack of experience
      or skill.
      Equipment
      Proper working equipment must be available where intubation may be
      needed—pillow, suction, laryngoscope (and spare) with interchange-
      able blades, ET tubes of different diameters (cut to suitable lengths,
      but with uncut tubes available), syringe and clamp for cuff, connectors,
      ﬂexible stylet, gum-elastic bougie, lubricating jelly, Magill’s forceps, tape for
      securing ET tube. A face mask and ventilating bag, and oral/nasal airways
      must be immediately available. Laryngeal masks and cricothyroidotomy
      equipment must be accessible. Fibre-optic laryngoscopes are useful in
      skilled hands, but are not routinely kept in EDs.
      The patient
      Patients may be difﬁcult to intubate because of facial deformity or
      swelling, protruding teeth, d mouth opening from trismus or trauma, d
      neck movement or instability of the cervical spine, epiglottitis or laryngeal
      problems, tracheal narrowing or deviation, blood, vomit or FB in the
      airway.
      Circumstances and skills
      Intubation is much easier in the controlled environment of an operating
      theatre than in an emergency in the ED or in pre-hospital care. Skilled help
      is vital—in-line immobilization of the neck, cricoid pressure, and assistance
      with equipment and cuff inﬂation are needed. Practice intubating manikins
      regularly.
      Practical points
      Before attempting intubation, oxygenate by bag and mask ventilation.
      Take a deep breath as you start intubation—if the patient is not intubated
      successfully when you have to breathe again, remove the ET tube and
      laryngoscope, and ventilate with O2 for 1–2min using a bag and mask
      before making another attempt. Consider adjusting the patient’s position,
      using a different size of laryngoscope blade or ET tube or a stylet or
      bougie. Cricoid pressure can help by pushing the larynx backwards into
      view. The BURP manoeuvre (Backwards Upwards Rightwards Pressure
      on the thyroid cartilage) may be useful in a difﬁcult intubation.
      Oesophageal intubation
      Fatal if unrecognized. The best way of conﬁrming tracheal intubation is to
      see the ET tube pass between the vocal cords. Inadvertent oesophageal
      intubation can produce misleadingly normal chest movements and breath
      sounds. End-tidal CO2 measurement helps to conﬁrm tracheal intubation,
      but end-tidal CO2 can be misleadingly i in patients who have taken
      antacids or ﬁzzy drinks. If in doubt, remove the ET tube and ventilate with
      bag and mask.
                                                  DIFFICULT INTUBATION             315

Failed intubation drill
Persistent unsuccessful attempts at intubation cause hypoxia and i risk of
aspiration and damage to teeth and other structures. If three attempts at
intubation are unsuccessful, follow a failed intubation drill:
• Inform all staff that intubation attempts have ceased and get senior
   help.
• Ventilate the patient on 100% O2 using bag and mask, and an oral or
   nasal airway, while an assistant maintains cricoid pressure.
• If ventilation is impossible, turn the patient onto the left side and tilt the
   trolley head down, while maintaining cricoid pressure. If ventilation is
   still impossible release cricoid pressure slowly and attempt to ventilate
   again.
• A laryngeal mask airway (LMA) can be very useful in this situation but
   requires training. Practice the technique of LMA insertion on manikins
   and on patients in the operating theatre whenever possible.
• Cricothyroidotomy (b p.326) is rarely needed, but must be performed
   promptly if necessary.
• In non-emergency cases, the patient can be allowed to wake up, but this
   is not an option in a life-threatening emergency. Discuss the problem
   with a senior anaesthetist.
• Warn the patient and GP if the difﬁculty with intubation is liable to
   recur.
Laryngospasm
Laryngospasm occurs when the laryngeal muscles contract and occlude
the airway, preventing ventilation and causing hypoxia.
Causes
• Stimulation of the patient during light anaesthesia.
• Irritation of the airway by secretions, vomit, blood or an oropharyngeal
  airway.
• Irritant anaesthetic vapours.
• Extubation of a lightly anaesthetized patient.
Treatment
• Give 100% O2.
• Clear the airway of secretions, using gentle suction.
• Gently ventilate the patient using a bag and mask. Over-inﬂation is liable
  to ﬁll the stomach and cause regurgitation.
• Monitor the ECG for bradycardia or arrhythmias.
In severe laryngospasm, an experienced anaesthetist may consider
deepening anaesthesia or giving suxamethonium to allow intubation, or
ventilation with a bag and mask. In a hypoxic patient, suxamethonium may
cause bradycardia requiring treatment with atropine.
316    CHAPTER 7 Analgesia and anaesthesia

      General anaesthetic drugs
      GA should only be given after anaesthetic training.
      IV anaesthetic induction agents are used for induction of anaesthesia,
      as the sole drug for short procedures (eg cardioversion), for treatment
      of status epilepticus unresponsive to other anticonvulsants (b p.149),
      for total IV anaesthesia and for sedation of a ventilated patient. They are
      particularly hazardous in patients with upper airway obstruction or severe
      hypovolaemia. Thiopental, etomidate and many other drugs are unsafe in
      acute porphyria (see b p.165 and BNF).
      Propofol is particularly useful in day-case surgery, and for manipulation of
      fractures and dislocations, because recovery is rapid. The injection may
      be painful. Hypotension is common and severe bradycardia may occur.
      Induction dose is 1.5–2.5mg/kg.
      Etomidate causes less hypotension than propofol or thiopental (and so
      may be useful in patients who are already hypotensive), and recovery
      is rapid. However, the injection is painful, and uncontrolled muscle
      movements and adrenocortical suppression may occur. Induction dose
      is up to 0.3mg/kg.
      Ketamine (b p.278) is used mainly in prehospital care, but may be useful
      for rapid sequence intubation in hypotensive patients and in acute asthma.
      Induction dose is 1–2mg/kg IV.
      Thiopental (thiopentone) is a barbiturate drug. Thiopentone solution is
      unstable and has to be prepared from powder to form a 2.5% solution
      (25mg/mL). Care is needed with injections because extravasation causes
      irritation, and arterial injection is particularly dangerous. Hypotension may
      occur, especially with overdosage. The induction dose in a ﬁt adult is up
      to 4mg/kg (child: 2–7mg/kg).
      Muscle relaxants
      Suxamethonium is a short-acting depolarizing muscle relaxant, which is
      often used to allow intubation, especially in rapid sequence induction of
      anaesthesia (b p.312). In a dose of 1mg/kg it causes muscle fasciculation
      followed rapidly by ﬂaccid paralysis. Suxamethonium is contra-indicated
      in hyperkalaemia and also in burns, paraplegia or crush injuries, where
      dangerous hyperkalaemia may develop if suxamethonium is used 5–120 days
      after injury. Suxamethonium causes i ICP and i intraocular pressure. Usual
      duration of action is 85min, but prolonged paralysis occurs in patients with
      abnormal pseudo-cholinesterase enzymes.
      Rocuronium is a muscle relaxant that may be used for intubation if
      suxamethonium is contraindicated.
      Atracurium and vecuronium are non-depolarizing muscle relaxants,
      which act for 820–30min. They cause fewer adverse effects than older
      relaxants (eg pancuronium). Paralysis from these drugs can be reversed
      with neostigmine, which is given with atropine or glycopyrronium to
      prevent bradycardia.
                                      GENERAL ANAESTHETIC DRUGS               317

Inhalational anaesthetics
These can be used for analgesia (especially Entonox®), induction of
anaesthesia (particularly in upper airway obstruction, when IV induction of
anaesthesia is hazardous), and for maintenance of anaesthesia.
Nitrous oxide (N2O) is widely used for analgesia as Entonox®, a 50:50
mixture with O2 (b p.278). It is also used frequently in GA in a
concentration of 50–70% in O2, in combination with other inhaled or
IV anaesthetics. N2O is contraindicated in certain circumstances (eg
undrained pneumothorax)—see b p.278.
Halothane, enﬂurane, isoﬂurane, and sevoﬂurane are inhalational
anaesthetic agents that are given using specially calibrated vaporizers in
O2, or a mixture of N2O and O2. Sevoﬂurane is particularly useful for
gas induction of anaesthesia in upper airway obstruction. Halothane is
also effective for gas induction, but now rarely used because of the risk
of hepatotoxicity, especially after repeated use. Halothane sensitizes the
heart to catecholamines, so adrenaline must not be used with halothane.
These inhalational anaesthetic drugs can cause malignant hyperpyrexia
(b p.265) in susceptible patients.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 8                                             319

Major trauma

Major trauma: treatment principles               320
Investigations in major trauma                   322
Airway obstruction: basic measures               324
Airway obstruction: surgical airway              326
Tension pneumothorax                             328
Chest wall injury                                330
Traumatic pneumothorax                           334
Haemothorax                                      335
Chest drain insertion                            336
Pulmonary contusions and aspiration              338
Penetrating chest injury                         340
Aortic injury                                    344
Focused assessment with sonography for trauma
   (FAST) scan                                   346
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL)               347
Blunt abdominal trauma                           348
Penetrating abdominal trauma                     350
Renal trauma                                     351
Bladder, urethral, and testicular trauma         352
Head injury: introduction                        354
Head injury: triage and monitoring               356
Head injury: history                             358
Head injury: examination                         360
Head injury: imaging                             362
Management of serious head injury                364
Minor head injury                                366
Post-concussion symptoms                         368
Maxillofacial injuries: introduction             370
Middle third facial fractures                    372
Zygomatic, orbital and frontal sinus fractures   374
Mandibular injuries                              376
Penetrating neck trauma                          378
Spine and spinal cord injury                     380
Dermatomes                                       386
Gunshot injuries                                 388
Blast injuries                                   389
Burns: assessment                                390
Major burns: resuscitation                       392
Inhalation injury                                394
Management of smaller burns                      396
Crush syndrome                                   398
320    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Major trauma: treatment principles
      Patients who present with serious (or apparently serious) injuries require
      immediate assessment and resuscitation. The ﬁner points of history taking
      may have to wait until later. However, suspect major trauma in:
      • High speed road collisions, vehicle ejection, rollover, prolonged extrication.
      • Death of another individual in the same collision.
      • Pedestrians thrown up or run over by a vehicle.
      • Falls of more than 2m.
      Management of speciﬁc injuries is outlined in subsequent pages. Although
      treatment should be tailored to the needs of each individual patient, many
      therapeutic interventions are common to all patients:
      Airway control
      Use basic manoeuvres (suction, chin lift, oropharyngeal airway) to open
      the airway and apply O2 by face mask (b p.324). Avoid tilting the head or
      moving the neck if there is a chance of neck injury. If the airway remains
      obstructed despite these measures, get ED and ICU and/or anaesthesia
      help and consider advanced manoeuvres (b p.326).
      O2
      Provide high ﬂow O2 to all. Patients who are apnoeic or hypoventilating
      require assistance by bag and mask ventilation prior to tracheal intubation
      and IPPV.
      Cervical spine control
      This is the ﬁrst priority in any patient who presents with possible spine injury
      (eg neck pain, loss of consciousness). Provide immediate in-line manual
      cervical immobilization by placing one hand on each side of the patient’s
      head and holding it steady (without traction) and in line with the remainder
      of the spine. Whilst maintaining manual immobilization, ask an assistant to
      apply an appropriately sized hard cervical collar. Adhesive tape and sandbags
      may be applied, but may cause problems in certain patients (eg patients who
      are vomiting or uncooperative patients who have consumed alcohol).
      IV ﬂuids
      Insert 2 large cannulae into forearm or antecubital fossae veins. If initial
      attempts fail, consider a femoral venous line or an intra-osseous line. If these
      fail or are inappropriate, consider a central line or a cut-down onto the long
      saphenous vein. However, bear in mind the difﬁculties and potential hazards
      of attempting central venous access in hypovolaemic patients.
      Commence IV ﬂuids for patients with hypovolaemic shock with 1L of 0.9%
      saline (or Hartmann’s solution) in adults (20mL/kg in children). Consider
      urgent blood transfusion if >2L (in an adult) have been given (b p.174)
      and look for sources of bleeding—chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
      Analgesia
      Adequate pain relief is often forgotten or deferred. Give morphine IV
      (diluted in saline to 1mg/mL) titrated in small increments according to
      response. Provide an antiemetic (eg cyclizine 50mg IV) at the same time.
      Consider other forms of analgesia (eg regional nerve blocks, immobilization,
      and splintage of fractures).
                            MAJOR TRAUMA: TREATMENT PRINCIPLES                 321

Antibiotics
Give prophylactic IV antibiotics for compound fractures and penetrating
wounds of the head, chest or abdomen. Antibiotic choice follows local
policy—a broad spectrum antibiotic (eg cefuroxime) is useful.
Tetanus
Ensure tetanus prophylaxis in all patients (b p.410).
Advanced trauma life support (ATLS®)
The ATLS concept was introduced by the American College of Surgeons
in an attempt to improve the immediate treatment of patients with serious
injury. The ATLS® approach has enabled some standardization of trauma
resuscitation. According to ATLS®, treatment of all patients with major
trauma passes through the same phases:
• Primary survey.
• Resuscitation phase.
• Secondary survey.
• Deﬁnitive care phase.
A key feature of ATLS® is frequent re-evaluation of the patient’s problems
and the response to treatment. Any deterioration necessitates a return to
evaluate the ‘ABC’ (airway, breathing, and circulation).
Primary survey
On initial reception of a seriously injured patient, life-threatening prob-
lems should be identiﬁed and addressed as rapidly as possible. An ‘ABC’
approach is adopted, with each of the following aspects being quickly
evaluated and treated:
A—airway maintenance with cervical spine control.
B—breathing and ventilation.
C—circulation and haemorrhage control.
D—disability (rapid assessment of neurological status).
E—exposure (the patient is completely undressed to allow full examination).
With optimum stafﬁng and direction, instead of considering each of these
aspects sequentially (from ‘A’ to ‘E’), aim to address them simultaneously.
Resuscitation phase
During this period, treatment continues for the problems identiﬁed
during the primary survey. Further practical procedures (eg insertion of
oro/nasogastric tube, chest drain and urinary catheter) are performed.
Occasionally, immediate surgery (damage control surgery) is required for
haemorrhage control before the secondary survey.
Secondary survey
This is a head to toe examination to identify other injuries. This should be
accompanied by relevant imaging and other investigations. Monitor the
patient closely—any deterioration requires a repeat ABC assessment.
A high index of suspicion is essential to avoid missing occult injuries—
particularly in the severely injured and those with d conscious level.
Deﬁnitive care phase
The early management of all injuries is addressed, including fracture
stabilization and emergency operative intervention.
322    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Investigations in major trauma
      Select speciﬁc investigations according to the presentation, but bear in
      mind that all patients with major trauma require: group and save/X-match,
      BMG, X-rays, ABG. Consider measuring lactate levels.
      BMG
      This is mandatory for all patients with major trauma and particularly
      important on any patient with GCS<15/15.
      SpO2
      Attach a pulse oximeter on ED arrival, then monitor continuously.
      Blood tests
      Check U&E, FBC, and glucose in all patients. If there is any possibility of
      signiﬁcant haemorrhage, request a group and save, or cross-match. Request
      a baseline clotting screen in patients with major haemorrhage or those at
      special risk (eg alcoholics or those on anticoagulants). Request fresh frozen
      plasma and platelets early for patients with major haemorrhage.
      X-rays
      Multiply injured patients often require multiple X-rays. Obtain CXR and
      pelvic X-rays as a minimum. Cervical spine X-rays do not change the initial
      management in the resuscitation room and can be deferred to the secondary
      survey. Don lead aprons and gloves, and remain with the patient whilst
      X-rays are taken—in particular, ensure satisfactory immobilization of the
      cervical spine throughout. Accompany the patient if he needs to be taken
      to the radiology department for further imaging.
      Urinalysis
      Test the urine for blood if there is suspicion of abdominal injury.
      Microscopic haematuria is a useful marker of intra-abdominal injury.
      Arterial blood gas
      Provides useful information about the degree of hypoxia, hypoventilation
      and acidosis. In critically ill patients (especially those requiring ventilatory
      support or those destined for neurosurgery/ICU) repeat as necessary and
      consider inserting an intra-arterial line to continuously monitor BP.
      Electrocardiogram
      Monitor all patients; record an ECG if >50 years or signiﬁcant chest trauma.
      Computed tomography scan
      CT is increasingly used to evaluate head, neck and truncal injuries. An
      appropriately trained doctor should accompany the patient to the CT
      scanner and monitoring must continue. Local protocols will dictate which
      patients have a total body ‘pan scan’ rather than selective imaging. Patients
      with haemodynamic instability should not go to the CT scanner.
      USS (FAST) and DPL
      Focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST; b p.346) is a USS
      technique to identify free ﬂuid in the peritoneal or pericardial cavities. It can
      be performed by a trained ED doctor, surgeon, or radiologist. Local policy
      and expertise will determine individual ED practice. DPL (b p.347) is rarely
      used now in developed countries given the availability of FAST and CT. DPL
      still plays an important role if FAST and CT are not available.
      Other investigations
      Angiography is indicated in certain speciﬁc circumstances (major pelvic
      fracture, aortic injury). Occasionally, other tests requiring specialist expertise
      (eg echocardiography) may prove to be useful.
                                           INVESTIGATIONS IN MAJOR TRAUMA                     323

Trauma scoring
Trauma scoring is often used in research on the epidemiology and man-
agement of trauma. A basic understanding of the accepted system of
trauma scoring may be of beneﬁt to those treating injured patients.
Injury Severity Score (ISS)
The ISS is widely used to retrospectively score the anatomical injuries of
an individual patient. The score is obtained by ﬁrst scoring each individual
injury using the Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS), which attributes a score
between 1 and 6 to each individual injury, as follows:
   AIS 1 = minor injury             AIS 4 = severe injury
   AIS 2 = moderate injury          AIS 5 = critical injury
   AIS 3 = serious injury           AIS 6 = inevitably fatal injury
To calculate the ISS from an array of AIS scores for a patient, the 3 highest
AIS scores in different body regions are squared then added together.
ISS considers the body to comprise 6 regions: head/neck; face; chest;
abdomen; extremities; external (skin). Possible ISS scores range from 1 to
75. Any patient with an AIS = 6 is automatically given an ISS of 75. See
www.aast.org/Library/TraumaTools/InjuryScoringScales.aspx
For example, see Table 8.1.

 Table 8.1
 Injuries                                                           AIS (body region)
 Closed linear temporal skull fracture                              AIS = 2 (head/neck)
 Major aortic arch rupture at its root                              AIS = 5 (chest)
 Bilateral pulmonary contusions                                     AIS = 4 (chest)
 Massive splenic rupture with hilar disruption                      AIS = 5 (abdomen)
 Multiple widespread superﬁcial abrasions                           AIS = 1 (external)
 ISS=(5)2 + (5)2 + (2)2 = 54. The ISS is non-linear and some scores (eg 15) are impossible.
 One accepted deﬁnition of ‘major trauma’ is an ISS >15.

The Revised Trauma Score
The Revised Trauma Score (RTS) is used to assess the physiological
disturbance of a trauma patient. The score is calculated from the respira-
tory rate, systolic BP and GCS. Each of these parameters are assigned a
code (value) to which a weighting factor is applied. The 3 resultant scores
are then added together to give the RTS. The RTS ranges from 0 (worst
possible) to 7.84 (best).
TRISS methodology
Combining the ISS with the RTS and adding a weighting factor according to
the age of the patient, it is possible to calculate a ‘Probability of Survival’ (Ps)
for each patient, based upon the national norm. Patients who survive with
Ps<0.5 are regarded as ‘unexpected survivors’; patients who die with Ps>0.5
as ‘unexpected deaths’. By analysing the results of treating a large number of
patients, TRISS methodology may be used to compare ‘performances’ (eg of
one hospital against the national norm).
324    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Airway obstruction: basic measures
      Severely injured patients die rapidly unless oxygenated blood reaches
      the brain and other vital organs. Clear, maintain, and protect the airway,
      ensure that ventilation is adequate and give O2 in as high a concentra-
      tion as possible. The most urgent priority is to clear an obstructed airway,
      but avoid causing or exacerbating any neck injury: instruct someone to
      hold the head and neck in a neutral position until the neck is satisfactorily
      immobilized. Ensure you always wear personal protective equipment.
      When treating any seriously injured patient, always ensure that O2, suction
      and airway equipment are readily available. Get senior ED ICU/anaesthetic
      help early if a patient with a serious airway problem arrives or is expected.
      Causes of airway obstruction
      • Coma from any cause can result in airway obstruction and loss of
        protective airway reﬂexes.
      • Blood or vomit may block the airway.
      • The airway may be disrupted by trauma of the face or larynx, or may be
        occluded by a haematoma or by oedema following burns.
      Assessment of airway obstruction
      Talk to the patient and see if he responds. A lucid reply shows that the
      airway is patent, that he is breathing and that some blood is reaching the
      brain, at least for the moment. Ensure that the neck does not move until it
      has been checked and cleared of injury (b p.320).
      Look and listen to check how the patient is breathing. Complete airway
      obstruction in someone who is still trying to breathe results in paradoxical
      movements of the chest and abdomen, but no breath sounds. Gurgling,
      snoring and stridor are signs of partial obstruction.
      Management of airway obstruction
      • Look in the mouth and pharynx for FBs, blood, and vomit. The tip of a
        laryngoscope may be useful as an illuminated tongue depressor.
      • Remove any FB with Magill’s forceps and suck out any liquid with a large
        rigid suction catheter. See if the patient responds and has a gag reﬂex,
        but beware of precipitating coughing or vomiting.
      • If vomiting occurs, tilt the trolley head down and suck out any vomit.
      • Lift the chin and use the jaw thrust manoeuvre (see opposite) to open
        the airway, but do not ﬂex or extend the neck.
      • After any airway intervention, look, listen, and feel to reassess airway
        patency and efﬁcacy of breathing.
      • If the gag reﬂex is absent or poor, insert an oropharyngeal airway
        (see opposite). This helps to hold the tongue forwards, but can cause
        vomiting or coughing if there is a gag reﬂex. If the gag reﬂex is present
        or the patient’s jaws are clenched, consider a nasopharyngeal airway.
        Although a nasopharyngeal airway is useful in some situations, avoid its
        use if there is evidence of severe facial or head injury.
      • If the airway is now patent and the patient is breathing, give high
        concentration O2 (15L/min via a non-rebreathing reservoir mask).
      • If the airway is patent, but breathing inadequate, ventilate the patient with
        O2 bag and mask device and prepare for tracheal intubation. If possible,
        one person should hold the mask on the face with both hands to ensure a
        good seal, whilst a second person squeezes the ventilation bag.
                            AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION: BASIC MEASURES                  325

Insertion of oropharyngeal airway
• Select the appropriate size of airway.
• Hold an airway against the patient’s face. A correctly sized airway
  reaches from the corner of the mouth to the external auditory canal.
  A large adult usually needs a size 4 airway, most men require size 3,
  some women need a size 2. An incorrectly sized airway may make the
  obstruction worse, rather than better.
• Open the patient’s mouth and use a rigid suction catheter with high
  power suction to suck out any ﬂuid or blood from the oropharynx.
• Insert the oropharyngeal airway ‘upside down’ for 4–5cm (half way),
  then rotate it 180° and insert it until the ﬂange is at the teeth.
• In children, use a laryngoscope as a tongue depressor and insert the
  airway the ‘correct way up’ to avoid trauma to the palate.
• Re-check the airway and breathing and give high ﬂow O2.
• Ventilate the patient if breathing is inadequate.
Insertion of nasopharyngeal airway
• Select an appropriate airway, usually a 7.0mm for adult males and
  a 6.0mm for adult females. A safety pin through the ﬂange end will
  prevent displacement into the nose or nasopharynx.
• Lubricate the airway with water or a water-soluble lubricant.
• Insert the tip of the airway into one nostril and direct the airway
  posteriorly, aiming the tip at the tragus of the ear.
• The airway should slide easily into the nose until the ﬂange abuts
  the nostril and the tip is just visible in the pharynx. Never force a
  nasopharyngeal airway into the nostril—any bleeding produced will
  markedly aggravate the airway problem.
• Re-check the airway and breathing and give high ﬂow O2.
Jaw thrust manoeuvre
The aim of this is to open the upper airway with minimum movement of
the cervical spine. Place the foreﬁngers of both hands immediately behind the
angles of the mandible and push the mandible anteriorly. This will lift the
tongue anteriorly and thus away from the posterior pharyngeal wall.
Tracheal intubation in trauma
An injured patient who has no gag reﬂex needs tracheal intubation to
maintain the airway and protect it against blood and vomit. Intubation
may also be needed because of: apnoea (after initial ventilation with a
bag-valve-mask), respiratory inadequacy, to prevent potential obstruction
from facial burns or to allow manipulation of ventilation in patients with
i ICP). Intubation in such circumstances requires emergency anaesthesia:
suitable expertise, appropriate equipment and assistance are essential
(b p.312). An assistant must hold the head to prevent movement of the
neck during intubation, while another assistant provides cricoid pressure.
Conﬁrm correct tracheal tube placement by:
• Seeing the tube pass through the cords.
• Observing symmetrical chest movement.
• Listening over both axillae for symmetrical breath sounds.
• Conﬁrming placement with end-tidal carbon dioxide (CO2) monitoring.
If airway obstruction is complete, the obstruction cannot be relieved and
intubation is impossible, an urgent surgical airway is needed (b p.326).
326    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Airway obstruction: surgical airway
      Surgical cricothyroidotomy or jet insufﬂation of the airway via a needle
      cricothyroidotomy is needed if the airway is obstructed by trauma,
      oedema or infection, and the trachea cannot be intubated. Emergency
      tracheostomy is not indicated in this situation because it is too time-
      consuming to perform and the necessary expertise may not be available.
      Needle cricothyroidotomy
      This is a rapid temporizing measure whilst preparation is made for a deﬁn-
      itive airway (eg surgical cricothyroidotomy). Jet insufﬂation via a cannula
      placed through the cricothyroid membrane can provide up to 45min of
      oxygenation of a patient with partial airway obstruction (Fig. 8.1).
      • Use a large IV cannula-over-needle (adults: 12 or 14G; children: 16 or
         18G), attached to a syringe. If right-handed, stand on the patient’s left.
      • Palpate the cricothyroid membrane between the thyroid and cricoid
         cartilages. Hold the cricoid cartilage ﬁrmly with the left hand.
      • Pass the needle and cannula at a 45° angle to the skin in the midline
         through the lower half of the cricothyroid membrane into the trachea.
      • Aspirate whilst advancing the needle. Aspiration of air conﬁrms entry
         into the trachea. Withdraw the needle whilst advancing the cannula
         down into position in the trachea.
      • Connect the cannula via a Y connector or O2 tubing with a side hole to
         wall O2 at 15L/min (in a child the rate should initially be set in L/min at
         the child’s age in years, increasing if necessary until capable of causing
         chest movement). Hold the cannula ﬁrmly in position. Occlude the side
         hole or the end of the Y connector with a thumb for 1 in 5sec to give
         intermittent insufﬂation of O2.
      Spontaneous breathing through the small airway of a cannula is very
      difﬁcult, but the patient should be able to exhale partially in the 4sec
      between jets of O2. However, CO2 retention occurs and limits the time
      that jet insufﬂation can be tolerated. Proceed immediately to a deﬁnitive
      airway (call a senior ENT or maxillofacial surgeon).
      Surgical cricothyroidotomy
      This technique is not appropriate in children aged <12 years.
      • Stand on the patient’s right. Feel the thyroid and cricoid cartilages and
        the cricothyroid membrane between them.
      • Clean the area and give LA (if the patient is conscious and time allows).
      • Hold the thyroid cartilage with the left hand and make a transverse
        incision through the skin and the cricothyroid membrane.
      • Use a tracheal dilator or curved artery forceps to open the hole into
        the trachea. Do not worry about any bleeding at this time.
      • Insert a lubricated tracheostomy tube (5–7mm diameter) through the
        cricothyroid membrane into the trachea.
      • Remove the introducer from the tracheostomy tube, inﬂate the cuff
        and connect the tube to a catheter mount and ventilation bag.
      • Conﬁrm correct placement with end-tidal CO2 monitoring.
      • Ventilate the patient with O2 and secure the tracheal tube.
      • Examine the chest and check for adequacy of ventilation.
                           AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION: SURGICAL AIRWAY           327

                                       Thyroid     Cricoid
                                       cartilage   cartilage
                                                               Trachea
                                          Cricothyroid
                                           membrane
Fig. 8.1 Needle cricothyroidotomy.

Fig. 8.2 Surgical cricothyroidotomy.
328    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Tension pneumothorax
      Tension pneumothorax is a life-threatening emergency and requires
      prompt recognition and treatment. It occurs when gas progressively
      enters the pleural space, but is unable to leave. Increasing pressure causes
      complete lung collapse on the affected side and ultimately pushes the
      mediastinum to the other side. Movement of the mediastinum leads to
      kinking of the great vessels, thereby d venous return and cardiac output.
      Additional compromise results from compression of the lung on the
      other side, particularly in patients undergoing IPPV. The process leading
      to tension pneumothorax may occur very rapidly, culminating in cardiac
      arrest within minutes.
      Causes
      Tension pneumothorax is seen most frequently following trauma, but it
      may also occur iatrogenically after attempted insertion of a central venous
      line (b p.56). A small (perhaps unsuspected) simple pneumothorax
      is particularly likely to become a tension pneumothorax when IPPV is
      commenced.
      Features
      • Dyspnoea, tachypnoea, and acute respiratory distress.
      • Absent breath sounds on the affected side.
      • Hyper-resonance over the affected lung (difﬁcult to demonstrate in a
        noisy environment).
      • Distended neck veins (unless hypovolaemic), tachycardia, hypotension,
        and ultimately, loss of consciousness.
      • Tracheal deviation away from the affected side (this is rarely clinically
        apparent).
      • i Airway pressure in a patient receiving IPPV.
      Diagnosis
      This is entirely clinical: do not waste time obtaining X-rays.
      Treatment
      • Apply high ﬂow O2 by face mask.
      • Perform immediate decompression by inserting an IV cannula (16G
        or larger) into the second intercostal space in the mid-clavicular line,
        just above the third rib (to avoid the neurovascular bundle; Fig. 8.3).
        Withdraw the needle and listen for a hiss of gas.
      • Tape the cannula to the chest wall.
      • Insert an axillary chest drain on the affected side immediately
        (b p.336).
      • Remove the cannula and apply an adhesive ﬁlm dressing.
      • Check the patient and obtain a CXR.
      Note: the risk of causing a pneumothorax by needle decompression in a
      patient who did not have one is approximately 10%. If the patient is very
      muscular or obese, consider using a longer cannula than normal (e.g. central
      venous line) to ensure that the pleural cavity is reached.
                                               TENSION PNEUMOTHORAX     329
                     Mid-clavicular line

Fig. 8.3 Site for needle decompression of right tension pneumothorax.
330    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Chest wall injury 1
      Background
      Blunt chest wall trauma is extremely common—both as an isolated injury
      and as part of multiple injuries. It can cause great morbidity in the elderly.
      Isolated rib fracture
      A history of trauma with subsequent musculoskeletal pain suggests rib
      fracture. The diagnosis is conﬁrmed by localized chest wall tenderness—
      the diagnosis of a single rib fracture is a clinical one. Check for features
      which are suggestive of pneumothorax (dyspnoea, d air entry, see b
      p.334), secondary pneumonia or multiple rib fractures, and if any are
      present, obtain a CXR.
      Treat uncomplicated isolated rib fracture with oral analgesia (eg
      co-codamol ± NSAID). Warn the patient that the rib may remain painful
      for ≥3 weeks and to seek medical advice if additional symptoms develop.
      Multiple rib fractures
      Observe the chest wall carefully for possible ﬂail segment, and look for
      clinical evidence of pneumothorax or, in late presentations, secondary
      pneumonia.
      Check SpO2, ABG, and obtain a CXR. Note that up to 50% of rib fractures
      may not be apparent on CXR.
      Treat Flail segment and pneumothorax (b p.332). Treat patients with
      uncomplicated multiple rib fractures according to the presence of other
      injuries and pre-existing medical problems as follows:
      In patients with other injuries requiring IPPV, discuss the potential need
      for chest drains with the ICU team (i risk of pneumothorax).
      Patients with pre-existing pulmonary disease and limited respiratory
      reserve require admission for analgesia and physiotherapy.
      Patients with chest infection often require admission for analgesia,
      antibiotics and physiotherapy, depending upon past medical history,
      clinical, and radiological ﬁndings.
                                                 CHEST WALL INJURY 1          331

Sternal fracture
Sternal fracture frequently occurs during road trafﬁc collisions, either
due to impact against the steering wheel or seat belt. The injury may be
associated with myocardial contusion, great vessel injury and spinal injury
(see below).
Features Anterior chest pain with localized tenderness over the sternum.
Investigations
• Place on a cardiac monitor.
• Record an ECG to exclude arrhythmias, MI (b p.70) or myocardial
  contusion (look for ST changes, particularly elevation). Consider further
  investigation with echocardiography.
• Check cardiac speciﬁc enzymes (troponins) if there are ECG changes.
• Request CXR and lateral sternal X-ray: the latter will demonstrate the
  fracture (which is usually transverse), the former, associated injuries.
Treatment Provide O2 and analgesia. Admit patients who have evidence
of myocardial contusion or injuries elsewhere. Only consider discharging
those patients who have an isolated sternal fracture, with a normal ECG,
no associated injuries and normal pre-existing cardiopulmonary function.
Patients who are discharged require oral analgesia (eg co-codamol
± NSAID) and GP follow-up.
Note Rarely, forced ﬂexion of the chest causes a displaced sternal
fracture with wedge fractures of upper thoracic vertebrae. Check the
spine carefully, ask about pain, and look for kyphosis and tenderness
(which may not be apparent). Lateral thoracic X-rays often fail to show
the upper thoracic vertebrae, so if injury is suspected there, consider
requesting a CT scan.
332    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Chest wall injury 2
      Flail segment
      Fractures of ≥3 ribs in 2 places allows part of the chest wall to move
      independently. This ﬂail segment usually indicates signiﬁcant injury to the
      underlying lung (typically pulmonary contusions). Large ﬂail segments occur
      laterally when several ribs on one side fracture anteriorly and posteriorly.
      Similarly, an anterior ﬂail segment is produced by bilateral fractures of all
      ribs anteriorly—in this case, the free portion comprises the sternum, costal
      cartilages, and the medial parts of the fractured ribs (see Fig. 8.4).
      Presentation The ﬂail segment causes pain and moves paradoxically
      compared with the rest of the chest wall, limiting the effectiveness of
      respiration. The diagnosis is a clinical one, but it can be difﬁcult to make.
      Look tangentially at the chest for areas which move paradoxically (ie
      inwards during inspiration and outwards during expiration). There may be
      associated features of respiratory distress (cyanosis, tachypnoea). Check for
      pneumothorax or haemothorax (b p.334).
      Investigations Assessment of the extent of respiratory compromise is
      largely clinical, aided by a few simple investigations:
      • SpO2 on pulse oximetry.
      • ABG—the combination of hypoxia and respiratory acidosis (i pCO2,
         i H+) indicates severe respiratory compromise.
      • CXR will demonstrate fractures and associated injuries (eg pulmonary
         contusions, pneumothorax, haemothorax).
      Treatment
      • Provide high ﬂow O2 and treat associated life-threatening problems.
      • Contact the ICU/anaesthesia team and carefully consider the need for
         immediate or urgent tracheal intubation with IPPV.
      • Careful observation and monitoring in an high dependency unit (HDU)
         or ICU is required.
      • Consider inserting an intra-arterial line for frequent ABG analyses.
      • Selected patients may beneﬁt from epidural analgesia in ICU.

                Lateral flail segment                      Anterior flail segment
      Fig. 8.4 Lateral (left) and anterior (right) ﬂail segments.
                                                   CHEST WALL INJURY 2           333

Ruptured diaphragm
Left-sided ruptures predominate (75%).
Major rupture of the diaphragm, with associated herniation of abdominal
contents into the chest, is a severe injury resulting from a signiﬁcant
traumatic insult (often massive abdominal crushing). Depending upon the
extent of the injuries, the patient may present with hypovolaemic shock
and respiratory compromise. Note that a ruptured diaphragm may have
some clinical features similar to a tension pneumothorax. Call a surgeon
and anaesthetist : the patient will require urgent intubation and IPPV.
Minor rupture, with less dramatic herniation, may present in more subtle
fashion and result from penetrating injury. The diagnosis is difﬁcult to
identify on CT scanning and is frequently missed initially—it is important
because:
• It is often associated with injury to both abdominal and thoracic contents.
• There are possible late complications (eg bowel herniation/obstruction).
• It does not heal spontaneously.
Suspect a ruptured diaphragm from the mechanism of injury, and an
abnormal or high hemi-diaphragm contour on erect CXR. Look for
stomach or bowel loops in the chest: the gastric tube may be seen coiled
in the intra-thoracic stomach. If a ruptured diaphragm is suspected,
resuscitate the patient and refer to a surgeon.
Oesophageal rupture
Traumatic (non-iatrogenic) rupture of the oesophagus is uncommon, but
may follow blunt or penetrating injury. Suspect it if the patient complains of
chest and back/neck pain in the presence of a normal ECG. Look for surgical
emphysema in the neck. CXR may demonstrate pneumomediastinum
(a layer of gas around the heart/mediastinum), a left sided pleural
effusion or pneumothorax. Provide O2, IV analgesia, and start IV antibi-
otics (eg cefuroxime 1.5g). Resuscitate, treat other injuries, and refer to a
cardiothoracic surgeon.
Boerhaave’s syndrome is ‘spontaneous’ rupture of the oesophagus
associated with overindulgence and vomiting. Patients are classically
middle-aged and present with severe chest pain, signs of shock, and
subcutaneous emphysema. If this condition is suspected, treat as outlined
above for traumatic oesophageal rupture.
334    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Traumatic pneumothorax
      Background
      Pneumothorax frequently results from blunt injury with associated rib
      fractures or from penetrating injury (knife stabbing or gunshot wound).
      It may also be iatrogenic, secondary to attempted insertion of a central
      venous line.
      Clinical features
      Patients are likely to complain of symptoms relating to the associated
      injuries (eg rib fractures, b p.330). The degree of breathlessness resulting
      from a pneumothorax depends largely upon its size. Other features may
      be present, including surgical emphysema, cyanosis, d air entry over the
      affected lung. Severe dyspnoea and distended neck veins/hypotension
      suggest tension pneumothorax (b p.328).
      CXR demonstrates the pneumothorax. Both inspiratory and expiratory
      X-rays are not required. Wherever possible, obtain an erect CXR. X-rays
      taken with the patient lying supine may not show a free lung edge, despite
      a considerable pneumothorax, because in this position air tends to lie
      anteriorly in the pleural space. If there is no deﬁnite pneumothorax visible
      on a supine CXR, features which are suggestive of a pneumothorax are:
      • Hyperinﬂation of the affected hemithorax with depressed hemidiaphragm.
      • Double contour of a hemidiaphragm.
      • Basal hyperlucency of the affected lung.
      • Visualization of apical pericardial fat tags.
      CT scan obtained to assess other injuries will easily demonstrate a
      pneumothorax. SpO2 and ABG may reveal hypoxia.
      Treatment
      Tension pneumothorax is an emergency requiring immediate needle
      decompression (b p.328). Provide O2 and drain other traumatic
      pneumothoraces using a chest drain and open technique, as described on
      b p.336.
      Note: although not currently considered to be ‘standard practice’, there
      is increasing experience with initially managing some patients who have
      isolated chest injury and small traumatic pneumothoraces in a conservative
      fashion, using close observation and no chest drain. Further experience
      will be needed before this approach can be widely recommended. Patients
      who have multiple injuries and/or other injuries (particularly those
      requiring GA and IPPV) certainly require chest drain insertion in the ED.
                                                        HAEMOTHORAX            335

Haemothorax
Blood may collect in the pleural cavity in association with a pneumothorax
(haemopneumothorax) or without (haemothorax). A large amount of
bleeding into the pleural space sufﬁcient to produce hypovolaemic shock
is termed massive haemothorax.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation is similar to that seen in traumatic pneumo-
thorax, except that there may be dullness to percussion over the affected
lung and, with massive haemothorax, evidence of hypovolaemia.
CXR Blood from a haemothorax collects under the affected lung, showing
up as i shadowing on a supine X-ray, with no visible ﬂuid level. It may be
very difﬁcult to distinguish haemothorax from pulmonary contusions on
supine X-ray, but haemothorax may produce blurring of a hemidiaphragm
contour or of the costophrenic angles.
Treatment
Give O2 and insert 2 large venous cannulae (sending blood for X-matching).
If hypovolaemic, start IV ﬂuids before inserting a large (≥32FG) chest
drain. Although it is common practice to try to direct the chest drain
towards the diaphragm, this seldom makes a difference in practice—it is
more important to use a chest tube of sufﬁcient calibre in order to minimize
blockages due to blood clots.
336    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Chest drain insertion
      Use the ‘open’ technique, as described below. Explain the procedure,
      obtain consent and conﬁrm that the patient has venous access, is breathing
      O2, and is fully monitored. Ensure that all equipment is ready and a good
      light and assistance are available. Give adequate IV opioid analgesia to
      conscious patients as this procedure can be painful.
      • Abduct the ipsilateral arm fully.
      • Don a sterile gown and gloves, and use a face shield to protect against
         blood splashes.
      • Clean the skin with antiseptic and cover with sterile drapes.
      • Identify the 5th intercostal space just anterior to the mid-axillary line
         (count down and across from the angle of Louis at the level of the 2nd
         rib) (Fig. 8.5, top).
      • Generously inﬁltrate LA (1% lidocaine ± adrenaline) under the skin and
         down to the periosteum at the upper edge of the 6th rib.
      • Prepare the chest drain; remove and discard the trocar (in adults, use a
         size 28–32FG; in children, use the largest size that will comfortably pass
         between the ribs).
      • Make a 2–3cm skin incision in the line of the ribs (Fig. 8.5).
      • Use blunt dissection with artery forceps to open the tissues down to
         the pleural space, just above the 6th rib.
      • Puncture the pleura with the artery forceps.
      • Insert a gloved index ﬁnger into the pleural cavity to ensure there are
         no adhesions and that you are within the thoracic cavity (Fig. 8.5).
      • Insert the chest drain ensuring that all drainage holes are inside the
         chest (typically ≈15–20cm in adults).
      • Connect the drain to an underwater seal and look for ‘swinging’.
      • Suture the drain securely in place (eg with heavy silk) and cover with
         an adhesive ﬁlm dressing and adhesive tape (Fig. 8.5). Whilst securing
         it, get an assistant to hold the drain so that it does not inadvertently
         fall out. It is useful to insert two untied sutures at the site of exit of the
         chest drain, so that these can be later tied to close the exit site when
         the drain is removed.
      • Check the underwater seal is ‘swinging’ in the tube with respiration.
      • Listen for air entry and check the patient.
      • Obtain a CXR to conﬁrm placement: if the tube has been inserted too
         far (eg so that it is touching the mediastinum), pull it back slightly and
         re-suture and secure in place.
      • Afterwards, keep the water seal drainage bottle below the level of the
         patient. Avoid clamping the tube.
      Referral to a thoracic surgeon If the chest drain initially yields >1500mL
      of blood, or subsequently drains >200mL/hr for 2hr, refer urgently to a
      thoracic surgeon for possible urgent thoracotomy.
      Ruptured bronchus Persistent, continuing bubbling of gas through the
      underwater drain may reﬂect a major rupture of the tracheobronchial
      tree, especially if the lung fails to re-expand. Bronchial rupture may also
      present with haemoptysis or tension pneumothorax. Involve a thoracic
      surgeon at an early stage.
                                            CHEST DRAIN INSERTION   337

                        Mid-axillary line

                                                  4th ICS
                                                  5th ICS

Fig. 8.5 Chest drain insertion.
338    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Pulmonary contusions and aspiration
      Pulmonary contusions
      High energy transfer during blunt injury (eg road trafﬁc collisions or high
      falls) often causes pulmonary contusions. Suspect these in all patients with
      ﬂail segments (b p.332).
      Clinical features
      Pulmonary contusions produce ventilation-perfusion mismatch which may
      lead to hypoxia and respiratory distress, and i the likelihood of ARDS.
      Radiological appearances
      Pulmonary contusions may be visible on initial CXR as patchy opaciﬁcation.
      However, initial radiological appearances are non-speciﬁc and may be
      confused with those seen after pulmonary aspiration or haemothorax
      (b p.335). X-ray changes resulting from pulmonary contusions tend to be
      progressive and become more prominent with time.
      Management
      Provide high ﬂow O2 and check ABG to help assess the need for GA,
      tracheal intubation and IPPV. Involve ICU specialists early.
      Pulmonary aspiration (b see p.112)
      Inhalation of vomit and other foreign material may add considerably to
      the damage resulting from the initial injury.
      Common associations
      • Inhalation of vomit after head injury with d conscious level and impaired
        protective laryngeal reﬂexes: gastric contents are particularly irritant to
        the respiratory tract.
      • Inhalation of blood and teeth after facial trauma.
      • Inhalation of water and foreign matter in near drowning (b p.258).
      Presentation
      Suspect pulmonary aspiration from the history, associated respiratory
      signs and X-ray appearance. The CXR may show diffuse opaciﬁcation
      affecting one or both lungs—the distribution depends upon the position
      at the time of aspiration.
      Management
      • Check SpO2, ABG, and obtain a CXR.
      • Provide high ﬂow O2.
      • Treat other injuries.
      • Consider the need for GA, tracheal intubation, and IPPV. Bronchoscopy
        may be needed to remove large FBs from within the bronchial tree.
      • Even if there is no urgent requirement for IPPV, remember that the
        respiratory problem is likely to worsen (with development of infection/
        ARDS), so involve the ICU team early.
      • Do not give routine antibiotics, unless there is a speciﬁc indication,
        such as immersion in sewage or in rat-infested water with the risk of
        developing leptospirosis (see b p.239).
This page intentionally left blank
340    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Penetrating chest injury 1
      In the UK, unlike the USA, chest ‘stabbing’ is far more frequent than
      ‘shooting’. Both types of injury can pose a serious threat to life.
      Initial assessment and resuscitation
      Do not be misled by seemingly innocuous wounds. The size of the external
      wound has no correlation with the potential for internal injury. All patients
      need O2, venous access (send blood for cross-matching, or group and
      save) and resuscitation according to an evaluation of the airway/cervical
      spine, breathing, and circulation. Remove all of the patient’s clothes and
      log roll to check for wounds to the back of the trunk and perineum.
      Particularly in gunshot injuries, make a quick early check for evidence
      of spinal cord injury. Remember also that penetrating chest injury often
      involves the abdomen (and vice-versa). During initial assessment aim to
      exclude or identify and treat the following:
      • Tension pneumothorax (b p.328).
      • Sucking chest wound (b p.342).
      • Cardiac tamponade (b p.342).
      • Massive haemothorax (b p.334 and 335).
      Further management depends partially upon haemodynamic status.
      The stable patient
      Many patients present without overt evidence of signiﬁcant injury:
      • Provide O2, secure venous access, and send blood for group and save.
      • Monitor SpO2, pulse, BP, and respiratory rate.
      • Administer minimal or no intravenous ﬂuids.
      • Perform a FAST scan if possible to look for cardiac tamponade
        (b p.346).
      • Obtain a CXR (ideally postero-anterior (PA) erect).
      • Record an ECG.
      • Provide IV analgesia as required (see b p.320).
      • Consider tetanus status and the need for prophylactic antibiotics
        (eg 1.5g IV cefuroxime—according to local policy).
      • Cover the chest wound with a sterile dressing (for sucking chest
        wound—see b p.342).
      • Drain any pneumothorax with a chest drain (having decompressed any
        tension pneumothorax—b p.328). Do not insert the drain through the
        wound (this i the risk of infection).
      • Refer all patients for admission, observation, formal wound cleaning,
        exploration, and closure. If the patient remains stable overnight, with
        no clinical or radiological abnormalities (on repeat CXR ≥6hr after the
        ﬁrst), they may be safely discharged with arrangements for review.
      • Carefully document the size, position and other features of the
        chest wound, remembering the potential medicolegal signiﬁcance
        (b p.402).
                                       PENETRATING CHEST INJURY 1            341

The unstable patient
Haemodynamic instability may be due to tension pneumothorax, massive
haemothorax, sucking chest wound, or cardiac tamponade. Treat each of
these as outlined on b p.342 involving a senior surgeon at an early stage.
Indications for thoracotomy
Thoracotomy in theatre will be required for signiﬁcant haemorrhage,
which typically means:
• >1.5 L of free blood obtained by initial chest drainage, or.
• >200mL of blood draining per hr, via the chest drain.
342    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Penetrating chest injury 2
      Open chest injury
      An open wound between the pleural cavity and the outside may cause
      respiratory insufﬁciency. When the chest expands on inspiration there is
      less resistance to air movement through the open chest wound than down
      the tracheobronchial tree. Air ﬂow into the lungs is reduced and the lung
      collapses as air enters the pleural space and produces a pneumothorax.
      Hypoxia develops rapidly.
      Features
      Look for respiratory distress, tachypnea, and cyanosis.
      Management
      • Provide high ﬂow O2.
      • Cover the chest wound with a square of polythene or sterile dressing.
      • Secure 3 sides of the dressing to the chest wall with adhesive tape,
        leaving one side free. This will allow air to exit through the chest
        wall during expiration, but prevent air entry into the chest cavity.
      • Insert a chest drain (not through the wound) to drain the pneumothorax.
      • Provide further resuscitation as necessary.
      • Call a thoracic surgeon to arrange formal wound closure.
      Cardiac tamponade
      Haemorrhage into the pericardial sac may compromise cardiac output.
      Continuing bleeding leads to cardiac tamponade, culminating in cardiac
      arrest. Cardiac tamponade usually results from penetrating trauma but
      may occur after blunt trauma.
      Features
      Clinical diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion. The oft-quoted Beck’s
      triad comprises distended neck veins, hypotension, and mufﬂed heart
      sounds. Identifying mufﬂed heart sounds is rarely easy in a noisy ED and
      neck veins may not be distended in a hypovolaemic patient. Kussmaul’s
      sign and pulsus paradoxus are classical, but rarely helpful.
      Investigation
      The investigation of choice is a FAST scan (b p.346) in the ED resuscitation
      room to identify the presence of pericardial ﬂuid. USS signs of cardiac
      tamponade include right ventricular collapse. Formal echocardiography
      is rarely available immediately. CXR and ECG are rarely helpful, but may
      exclude co-existent conditions (eg pneumothorax).
      Treatment
      • Provide O2, insert 2 IV lines, commence IV ﬂuid infusion if severely
        shocked and monitor ECG.
      • Request that the thoracotomy tray be made ready.
      • Contact the most senior available cardiothoracic/general/trauma
        surgeon and anaesthetist and alert the operating theatre.
      • If the patient’s condition permits, arrange immediate transfer for
        thoracotomy in theatre. Theatre thoracotomies have better outcomes
        than those done in the ED.
                                         PENETRATING CHEST INJURY 2              343

• If the patient deteriorates to a peri-arrest state, consider pericardiocen-
  tesis using a long 18G needle connected to a 20mL syringe and 3-way
  tap. Puncture the skin 1–2cm below the xiphisternum at 45° to the skin.
  Aspirate while advancing the needle cephalad, aiming towards the tip of
  the left scapula. ST and T wave changes, widened QRS or arrhythmias
  imply that the needle has been advanced too far.
• Aspiration of a small amount of blood (eg 20–40mL) may improve
  cardiac output temporarily and ‘buy time’ to organize thoracotomy.
• Pericardiocentesis is often unsuccessful due to clots which have formed
  in the pericardial sac and which cannot be aspirated.
• Perform immediate thoracotomy in the ED for cardiac arrest from
  penetrating trauma. Do not waste time on pericardiocentesis.
Thoracotomy for cardiac tamponade
Thoracotomy in the ED may be required in certain life-threatening
emergencies, including cardiac arrest due to penetrating chest injury: the
principal aim is to decompress the pericardium and relieve tamponade.
First exclude and treat other reversible causes of cardiac arrest (upper
airway obstruction, b p.324; tension pneumothorax, b p.328).
Thoracotomy is not indicated for cardiac arrest following blunt injury.
Procedure
• Summon expert help (ED consultant; cardiothoracic, general or trauma
  surgeon; anaesthetist) and proceed immediately. Do not wait.
• Whilst the thoracotomy tray is being opened, don gloves, a face shield and
  an apron, ensure that the patient is being ventilated with O2 via a tracheal
  tube, and start external chest compressions (b p.49). Continue rapid IV
  infusion via multiple lines and obtain blood for transfusion.
• Standing on the patient’s left side, abduct the left arm, stop chest com-
  pressions and open the left chest wall. Start the incision at the medial
  end of the 5th intercostal space and cut laterally just above the 6th
  rib into the axilla. Use a rib retractor to access the thoracic cavity. If
  necessary, improve access further by continuing the incision medially
  using strong scissors to cut through the sternum and into the right 5th
  intercostal space (clamshell thoracotomy). Speed is of the essence.
• Identify the heart: carefully incise vertically through the bulging pericar-
  dium over its anterior surface, avoiding the left phrenic nerve.
• Evacuate blood from the pericardial sac and identify the damage.
• Place a ﬁnger over the cardiac defect and perform internal cardiac
  massage by compressing the heart between 2 ﬂat hands, with ﬁngers
  placed over defects. Close myocardial wounds using interrupted 4/0
  prolene sutures, using teﬂon or pericardial buttresses if necessary.
  Once sutures are in place, stop internal cardiac massage and check
  cardiac rhythm and output. If the heart is ﬁbrillating, deﬁbrillate using
  internal deﬁbrillation paddles, by placing a paddle over each side of the
  heart. Start with 5J energy initially, i as necessary to max of 50J. Use an
  external deﬁbrillator if no internal paddles are available.
• Once a pulse has been restored, ensure that hypovolaemia is corrected.
  Give cefuroxime 1.5g IV, insert an arterial line and urinary catheter,
  recheck U&E, glucose, FBC, and clotting.
• The cardiothoracic surgeon will direct further surgical management.
344    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Aortic injury
      The vast majority of aortic injuries (≈90%) are sustained during high energy
      blunt trauma (eg road trafﬁc collisions, high falls). Only a small proportion
      of these patients reach hospital with signs of life. The usual site of rupture
      is just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery, possibly caused
      by differential shearing forces between the mobile arch and the ﬁxed
      descending thoracic aorta. An alternative proposed mechanism is that
      during rapid deceleration the ﬁrst rib and clavicle swing down and directly
      ‘nip’ the aorta (‘osseous pinch’ theory). The injury is relatively unusual in
      children, who are perhaps protected by having more elastic tissues.
      Features
      Patients who reach hospital alive are most likely to have a partial or
      contained rupture, with a haematoma conﬁned by aortic adventitia. They
      may complain of chest and back pain and there may be a harsh systolic
      murmur, absent or d pulses (with differential BP between arms and legs),
      and evidence of hypovolaemic shock: features of other signiﬁcant non-
      aortic injuries may predominate.
      Diagnosis
      The diagnosis of aortic injury can be difﬁcult: adopt a high index of
      suspicion. An erect CXR is invaluable provided that the patient’s condition
      permits it.
      CXR features suggesting aortic injury include:
      • Widened mediastinum (>8cm on PA ﬁlm).
      • Abnormal aortic arch contour.
      • Deviation of the trachea to the right side.
      • Deviation of an orogastric/NG tube to the right side (such that it lies to
        the right of the T4 spinous process).
      • Depression of the left main bronchus >40° below the horizontal.
      • Left pleural cap or fractured ﬁrst/second ribs are often quoted, but are
        of little diagnostic value.
      • The CXR may be normal!
      Management
      Resuscitate and treat other injuries. Aortic injuries are associated with
      other severe chest injuries, eg ﬂail segments, pulmonary contusions. As
      a minimum, provide O2, insert two IV cannulae, start IV ﬂuids, provide
      analgesia, monitor vital signs and SpO2. Check U&E, glucose, FBC, clotting,
      ABG, and cross-match. Insert urinary catheter and arterial line.
      Involve a cardiothoracic surgeon or a vascular surgeon with expertise in
      aortic injury. Refer urgently for specialist investigation (CT scan and/or
      aortography). Involve anaesthetist/ICU. Control BP (avoid over-infusion
      of IV ﬂuids; use glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) infusion IV to maintain systolic
      BP ≈90mmHg) prior to treatment. This usually involves open surgical
      repair, but some centres have reported good short-term results using
      endovascular stents.
This page intentionally left blank
346    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Focused assessment with sonography
      for trauma (FAST) scan
      Increasingly used in the ED resuscitation room to assess the chest and
      abdomen of acutely injured patients, especially those with shock.
      Can be performed by a trained ED doctor, surgeon, or radiologist.
      Advantages
      • Can be done in ED.
      • Quick: takes 2−3min.
      • Non-invasive.
      • Repeatable if concerns persist or the patient’s condition changes.
      Disadvantages
      • Operator dependent.
      • Does not deﬁne injured organ, only presence of blood or ﬂuid in
        abdomen or pericardium.
      Ideally performed with a portable or hand-held USS scanner.
      Looks at four areas for the presence of free ﬂuid only:
      • Hepatorenal recess (Morrison’s pouch).
      • Splenorenal recess.
      • Pelvis (Pouch of Douglas).
      • Pericardium.
      The scan is usually done in that order, as the hepatorenal recess is the
      ﬁrst to ﬁll with ﬂuid in the supine position, and is most easily identiﬁed.
      If the indication for FAST scanning is to identify cardiac tamponade, the
      ﬁrst view should be the pericardial view.
      Free ﬂuid appears as a black echo-free area:
      • Between the liver and the right kidney.
      • Between the spleen and the left kidney.
      • Behind the bladder in the pelvis.
      • Around the heart in the pericardium.
      A positive FAST scan is one which identiﬁes any free ﬂuid in the
      abdomen or in the pericardium.
      Visible free ﬂuid in the abdomen implies a minimum volume of ≈500mL.
      The ﬁnding of blood in the pericardium after trauma is an indication
      for emergency thoracotomy, ideally in the operating theatre; however,
      thoracotomy should be performed in the ED if the patient arrests.
      FAST scanning requires training prior to use on trauma patients; there is a
      signiﬁcant false-negative rate in inexperienced hands.1

      1 See http://www.trauma.org/index.php/main/article/214/
                             DIAGNOSTIC PERITONEAL LAVAGE (DPL)                  347

Diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL)
DPL is helpful in situations where clinical evidence of intra-abdominal
injury is equivocal and neither CT nor USS is available. DPL may also be
useful to search for intra-abdominal bleeding in shocked head-injured
patients, or those whose massive pelvic fracture is being externally ﬁxed
(see b p.466). DPL is used less often now that FAST scanning and CT
have become more readily available. Also, some injuries are treated
conservatively (eg ‘minor’ splenic injury in children) and so a +ve DPL is
of less value than a speciﬁc diagnosis made by CT. The open technique
of DPL is shown below. Ideally, DPL is done by the surgeon who will
perform the laparotomy if the DPL is +ve.
How to perform diagnostic peritoneal lavage
• Explain the procedure and obtain consent if conscious.
• Ensure that the bladder has been decompressed by a urinary catheter.
• Ensure that an orogastric/NG tube has been passed.
• Enlist an assistant and bright light.
• Clean the skin with antiseptic and drape with sterile towels.
• Inﬁltrate LA (1% lidocaine with adrenaline) around the proposed site of
  incision.
• Make a vertical midline skin incision ≈3cm long at a point one-third
  of the distance from the umbilicus to the symphysis pubis. However,
  use a supra-umbilical site if the patient has lower abdominal scars, is
  pregnant, or has a pelvic fracture. Request that the assistant exerts gentle
  pressure on the wound edges, in order to minimize bleeding.
• Divide the linea alba, identify the peritoneum and grasp it between
  2 surgical clips.
• Gently bring the peritoneum into the wound and feel its edge between
  ﬁnger and thumb to ensure that no bowel has been caught in the clips.
• Make a tiny peritoneal incision, insert a peritoneal dialysis catheter
  (without the needle) and direct it downwards into the pelvis.
• Gently twist the peritoneal clip to obtain a good seal around the
  catheter. Attempt to aspirate any free ﬂuid.
• If obvious enteric contents or >5mL blood is aspirated—stop, the DPL
  is +ve and the patient requires a laparotomy.
• Infuse 1L of warmed 0.9% saline. Keep the catheter and seal in place and
  allow 5min for the ﬂuid to mix. Agitate the abdomen gently.
• Place the empty bag on the ﬂoor and allow the ﬂuid to siphon out.
• Send ﬂuid for laboratory analysis. Since a +ve DPL commits the surgeon
  to a laparotomy, an objective measurement is helpful.
• Close the abdomen in layers.
Criteria for +ve DPL
• Aspiration of >5mL free blood or obvious enteric contents.
• RBC count >100,000/mm3.
• WBC count >500/mm3.
• Food debris or other enteric contents (eg vegetable ﬁbres).
Note: air enters the peritoneal cavity during DPL and may be visible on
subsequent CXR or abdominal X-rays.
348    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Blunt abdominal trauma
      Blunt injury to the abdomen may be isolated or associated with injuries
      elsewhere. Evaluation of the abdomen may be particularly difﬁcult in the
      latter situation. The mechanisms of injury responsible are diverse and
      include road trafﬁc collisions, crushing injuries, high falls, and direct blows
      (eg kicks and punches). Remember that lower chest injury may be associated
      with splenic or liver injuries.
      Examination
      • Assess for hypovolaemia. Check pulse, BP, and capillary reﬁll.
      • Look for bruising (eg ‘lap belt’ imprint). (Measurements of abdominal
        girth are unhelpful and unreliable as a means of assessing intra-abdominal
        haemorrhage).
      • Feel for tenderness and evidence of peritonism. Listening for bowel sounds
        is not helpful: their presence or absence is not a discriminating feature.
      • Check for femoral pulses.
      • Log roll to check for loin tenderness and back injury.
      • Examine the perineum and perform a rectal examination, checking
        perineal sensation, anal tone, rectal integrity/blood and in the male, the
        position of the prostate. A high-riding, ‘boggy’ or impalpable prostate
        may indicate urethral injury (see b p.352).
      Investigations
      The need for and choice of investigation depend upon individual
      circumstances, local policy, facilities, and expertise. Patients who are
      haemodynamically unstable or who have peritonism require immediate
      referral for laparotomy.
      Perform urinalysis in all patients. A positive urinalysis is a marker for intra-
      abdominal solid organ injury, not just renal tract injury. Insert a urinary
      catheter in patients who present with haemodynamic disturbance or who
      are critically ill (unless there is evidence of urethral injury, see b p.352).
      Perform a pregnancy test in all women of child bearing age.
      Serum amylase does not discriminate between those with signiﬁcant
      intra-abdominal injury and those without; it is unhelpful in the early stages
      of trauma resuscitation.
      Plain abdominal X-ray is rarely useful, unless associated bony injury
      or bowel perforation is suspected: free intraperitoneal gas may be
      demonstrated on an erect CXR.
      FAST (USS) provides a rapid, repeatable, non-invasive bedside test. It
      is operator-dependent. Haemoperitoneum is identiﬁed by scanning the
      hepatorenal and splenorenal recesses, and the pelvis. The pericardium
      can also be scanned to look for tamponade. See b p.346.
      CT scans are extensively used to evaluate abdominal injuries as well as
      identifying injuries in other regions (eg retroperitoneum, brain, chest).
      The major advantage of CT is the ability to diagnose the injured organ(s)
      within the abdomen and to quantify injuries (minor laceration of liver or
      spleen vs. multiple deep lacerations with signiﬁcant haemoperitoneum).
                                           BLUNT ABDOMINAL TRAUMA                 349

Initial stabilization (see b p.320)
• Provide O2.
• Treat airway and breathing problems.
• Insert 2 wide bore (>16G) IV lines.
• Send blood for U&E, glucose, FBC, clotting screen, and cross-matching.
• Give IV ﬂuids according to initial evidence of hypovolaemia and
  response to treatment. Give blood ± blood products early if unstable.
• Provide IV analgesia as necessary (contrary to popular opinion, this
  does not compromise clinical abdominal evaluation).
• Consider the need for orogastric/NG tube and urinary catheter.
• Involve a surgeon at an early stage.
• Inform the senior surgeon, duty anaesthetist and theatre staff if an
  urgent laparotomy is needed.
Further evaluation and treatment
Once resuscitation is under way, further evaluation and treatment will
depend largely upon the clinical situation:
Haemodynamically unstable Refer urgently to a senior surgeon for laparotomy.
Inform the operating theatre and the duty anaesthetist immediately. There is
no need (or time) to attempt to deﬁne the intra-abdominal injury. Damage
control surgery should be considered in unstable, acidotic or cold patients.
Clinical peritonism Resuscitate as above, provide IV antibiotics (eg cefuroxime
1.5g) and refer urgently to a surgeon for laparotomy.
Haemodynamically stable, no peritonism Refer to a surgeon for further
investigation and observation. FAST (USS) and abdominal CT scans are
very useful in further assessment of these patients. Depending on local
policy, others may be appropriately managed with regular observations
and clinical re-examination.
Possible abdominal injury in the multiply injured These patients provide a
diagnostic challenge: tailor investigations and management to individual
circumstances. FAST (USS) and DPL are rapid, simple, and useful tools
to help to identify signiﬁcant intra-abdominal haemorrhage in the
multiply injured patient. CT has superior diagnostic accuracy, but it is
time-consuming and requires transfer and IV contrast. If the patient
is haemodynamically stable, abdominal CT is conveniently performed
simultaneously with head CT. A patient who is haemodynamically unstable
should be transferred to theatre, never to the CT scanner.
Abdominal trauma in pregnancy
Involve a senior obstetrician and gynaecologist at an early stage. USS can
demonstrate fetal viability and look for signs of abruption and uterine
rupture. Remember to check Rhesus/antibody status—b p.594.
350    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Penetrating abdominal trauma
      Most penetrating abdominal injuries are caused by knives or guns. The
      size of the external wound bears no relationship to the severity of intra-
      abdominal injuries. These injuries have medicolegal implications (b p.403).
      Initial approach
      On receiving the patient, provide O2, secure venous access and resuscitate
      according to an initial assessment of:
      • Airway and cervical spine.
      • Breathing.
      • Circulation.
      Obtain complete exposure at an early stage in order to check for
      additional wounds to the chest, back, loins, buttocks, and perineum.
      Evaluation of abdominal injury
      Unless the patient presents with hypovolaemic shock, it may be difﬁcult to
      decide the extent and severity of the abdominal injury on clinical grounds.
      In addition to standard monitoring and palpation of the abdomen, perform
      a digital rectal examination and (especially in gunshot injuries) check carefully
      for spinal cord/cauda equina injury (b p.380).
      Investigations
      Urinalysis Check the urine for blood.
      Blood Check BMG, U&E, glucose, FBC, clotting, group and save/cross-match.
      X-rays Obtain an erect CXR if possible to check for free gas under the
      diaphragm and a supine abdominal X-ray to identify bullet fragments, etc.
      FAST (USS) FAST scanning will rapidly identify the presence of free intra-
      abdominal ﬂuid which would mandate a laparotomy (b p.346).
      DPL This is rarely helpful in penetrating injuries.
      Management
      • Give O2; insert two IV cannulas and send blood as outlined above.
      • In the unstable patient, give IV ﬂuid as necessary, but do not give
        excessive IV ﬂuids—aggressive infusion worsens outcome. A systolic BP
        ≈90mmHg in a conscious patient is enough until the start of surgery.
      • Provide IV analgesia (eg titrated increments of morphine) as required.
      • Give IV antibiotics (eg cefuroxime 1.5g + metronidazole 500mg).
      • Consider the need for tetanus prophylaxis (b p.410).
      • Cover the wound with a sterile dressing. Never probe or explore
        the wound in the ED to try and deﬁne depth and possible peritoneal
        penetration. Involve the surgeon early to decide further management.
      • Patients who are haemodynamically unstable, have gunshot wounds, or
        have obvious protruding bowel contents require urgent resuscitation
        and immediate laparotomy. Cover protruding omentum or bowel with
        saline soaked sterile swabs and do not push it back into the abdomen.
      • Investigation and treatment of other patients varies according to local
        policy. Some patients may be managed conservatively with monitoring
        and close observation.
                                                           RENAL TRAUMA           351

Renal trauma
Most renal injuries result from direct blunt abdominal trauma, the kidney
being crushed against the paravertebral muscles or between the 12th
rib and the spine. Indirect trauma (eg a fall from a height) can tear the
major blood vessels at the renal pedicle or rupture the ureter at the pelvi-
ureteric junction. Penetrating injuries are relatively rare. Many patients
with renal trauma also have other important injuries, which may obscure
the diagnosis of the renal injury.
Children are particularly prone to renal injuries. Trauma may uncover
congenital abnormalities, hydronephrosis, or occasionally incidental tumours.
Clinical features
Most patients give a history of a blow to the loin or ﬂank and have loin
pain followed by haematuria (which may be delayed). The loin is tender and
there may be visible bruising or abrasions. Worsening renal pain may indicate
progressive renal ischaemia. Perinephric bleeding can cause loin swelling and
a palpable mass. Haematuria may be absent in severe injuries in which there
are renal vascular tears, thrombosis or complete ureteric avulsion.
Investigations
Look for and record visible haematuria and test for microscopic
haematuria. Get venous access, send blood for FBC, U&E, glucose, clotting
screen, and group and save.
IVU was the standard investigation for suspected renal injuries, but this has
been largely replaced by abdominal CT. If CT is not available, IVU can be
used to elucidate the form and function of an injured kidney and conﬁrm a
functioning contra-lateral kidney. An unstable patient requiring immediate
laparotomy may need an intra-operative IVU to diagnose a renal injury
and to check that the other kidney is functioning.
CT Urgent abdominal CT is needed if there is frank haematuria or if the
patient was shocked (but is now stable) and has frank or microscopic
haematuria. The surgical team should be involved before CT is arranged.
Patients should be haemodynamically stable for transfer to CT. IVU is
unnecessary if contrast enhanced CT is planned or has been done.
FAST (USS) shows renal morphology and conﬁrms the presence of two
kidneys, but does not demonstrate function.
Selective angiography is occasionally helpful.
Stable patients with isolated microscopic haematuria do not need urgent
IVU or CT, but require review and appropriate follow-up.
Management
Most blunt renal injuries settle with bed rest and analgesia. Give prophylactic
antibiotics after consulting the surgical team and according to local policy.
Repeat and record pulse, BP, and T°.
Patients with penetrating renal injuries and severe blunt renal trauma need
urgent expert urological assessment ± emergency surgery: the warm
ischaemic time of a kidney is only ≈2hr. Resuscitate with IV ﬂuids and give
IV analgesia and antibiotics.
352    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Bladder, urethral, and testicular
      trauma
      Bladder injury
      Most bladder ruptures are into the peritoneal cavity, caused by direct
      blows to the lower abdomen. These injuries often occur in people with
      distended bladders. Bone fragments from a fractured pelvis may also
      penetrate the bladder (b p.466).
      Clinical features
      Lower abdominal pain ± peritonism may be associated with haematuria
      or an inability to pass urine. Look for perineal bruising and blood at the
      external urethral meatus. Perform a rectal examination to check for the
      position of the prostate and the integrity of the rectum.
      Investigations and management
      X-ray the pelvis to check for fractures. If there is no sign of urethral injury,
      pass a catheter to check for haematuria. Refer to the urology team. A
      cystogram will show extravasation from a bladder injury. Intra-peritoneal
      ruptures need laparotomy and repair. Extraperitoneal ruptures may heal
      with catheter drainage and antibiotics.
      Urethral injuries
      Posterior urethral tears are often associated with pelvic fractures.
      Urethral injury may also result from blows to the perineum (especially
      falling astride).
      Look for perineal bruising and blood at the external urethral meatus
      and perform a rectal examination (an abnormally high-riding prostate or
      inability to palpate the prostate imply urethral injury).
      If urethral injury is suspected, do not attempt urethral catheterization, but
      refer urgently to the urology team. Some urologists perform a retrograde
      urethrogram to assess urethral injury, but many prefer suprapubic
      catheterization and subsequent imaging.
      Penile injuries
      See b p.523.
      Testicular trauma
      Injury to the scrotum/testis may result in a scrotal haematoma or testicular
      rupture. Both conditions require good analgesia. Further treatment depends
      upon the exact diagnosis. USS may help to distinguish between scrotal
      haematoma and testicular rupture. Scrotal haematoma may respond
      to conservative measures. Testicular rupture requires urgent surgical
      exploration and repair.
      Scrotal injuries
      Wounds involving the scrotal skin may need to be sutured (preferably
      with absorbable sutures)—most heal rapidly. Refer for investigation if
      there is complete scrotal penetration with the attendant risk of damage
      to the testis, epididymis or vas deferens. If the testis is visible through the
      wound, refer for surgical exploration and repair in theatre.
This page intentionally left blank
354    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Head injury: introduction
      The size of the problem
      Many patients with serious or fatal trauma have suffered a head injury.
      Additionally, minor head injuries are a frequent reason for attendance at
      an ED. Blunt injury is far more common than penetrating injury.
      Common causes of head injury
      • Road trafﬁc collisions of all types.
      • Falls.
      • Assaults.
      • Sporting and leisure injuries.
      • Workplace injuries.
      • Other mishaps.
      Pathophysiology
      Brain injury may be primary or secondary.
      Primary injury occurs at the time of the head injury. This takes the form
      of axonal shearing and disruption, with associated areas of haemorrhage.
      This primary damage may be widespread (‘diffuse axonal injury’) or
      localized (eg ‘contre-coup’ frontal contusions in a fall hitting the occiput).
      Secondary injury occurs later, due to various problems that commonly
      co-exist. Many of these are preventable or treatable, and should thus be
      the focus during resuscitation:
      • Hypoxia.
      • Hypovolaemia and cerebral hypoperfusion.
      • Intracranial haematoma with localized pressure effects and i ICP.
      • Other causes of i ICP, including cerebral oedema and hypercapnia.
      • Epileptic ﬁts.
      • Infection.
      The role of intracranial pressure
      Once the skull sutures have fused, the cranium is a closed box. Thus, a
      small i in volume (eg from swelling or haematoma) results in a large i in
      ICP (see Fig. 8.6). As ICP i, cerebral perfusion pressure d, since:
              Cerebral perfusion pressure = Mean arterial pressure – ICP
      Once cerebral perfusion pressure falls <70mmHg, signiﬁcant secondary
      brain injury may occur. Control of ICP and BP (including avoiding wild
      swings in BP) is an important treatment goal, especially as the normal
      cerebrovascular auto-regulatory mechanisms are impaired after head
      injury. Cerebral arterioles remain sensitive to pCO2, however, with an
      i pCO2 resulting in marked arterial vasodilatation and unwanted i ICP.
      Controlling pCO2 to within normal levels is therefore important.
      i ICP produces a diminishing conscious level and causes herniation
      of the temporal lobe through the tentorial hiatus, compressing the
      oculomotor nerve, resulting in ipsilateral pupillary dilatation. This may
      progress to contralateral hemiparesis and brainstem compression with
      cardiorespiratory arrest. i ICP leads to a reﬂex i in systemic arterial BP
      together with bradycardia: this combination is the Cushing response.
                                                    HEAD INJURY: INTRODUCTION    355

Indications for referral to hospital
Any one of the following criteria indicates the need for hospital assessment:
• Impaired conscious level at any time.
• Amnesia for the incident or subsequent events.
• Neurological symptoms (vomiting, severe and persistent headache,
  seizures).
• Clinical evidence of a skull fracture (cerebrospinal ﬂuid leak, peri-orbital
  haematoma).
• Signiﬁcant extracranial injuries.
• Worrying mechanism (high energy, possible non-accidental injury,
  possible penetrating injury).
• Continuing uncertainty about the diagnosis after ﬁrst assessment.
• Medical co-morbidity (anticoagulant use, alcohol abuse).
• Adverse social factors (eg alone at home).
The following are highly recommended:
• The SIGN (Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network) guideline on
  head injury is accessible at www.sign.ac.uk
• The NICE (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence) clinical
  guidelines on head injury published in 2007 and accessible at www.nice.
  org.uk

                Intracranial pressure

                                        Intracranial blood volume
Fig. 8.6 ICP according to intracranial blood volume.
356    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Head injury: triage and monitoring
      Triage
      Every ED requires a system for the rapid initial assessment of head-injured
      patients. The exact system will depend upon local policy, expertise
      and facilities. It must enable patients with signiﬁcant injuries to receive
      immediate resuscitation and ensure urgent treatment of those patients
      liable to complications. Experienced nursing staff can quickly identify those
      patients in need of urgent attention, based upon:
      • The mechanism of injury.
      • History from the ambulance crew.
      • An assessment of vital signs.
      • Conscious level according to the Glasgow Coma Scale (b p.361).
      • Limb power.
      • Pupil responses.
      • BMG.
      For patients who are haemodynamically stable, alert and orientated, with no
      neurological deﬁcit and an apparently minor head injury, it is appropriate
      to proceed to obtaining a full history, as outlined on b p.358.
      For patients with multiple injuries and/or a serious head injury, there will be
      no time initially to obtain a full history. Instead, proceed rapidly to initial
      assessment and resuscitation. During the ﬁrst few seconds, it is useful to
      obtain an impression of the severity of the head injury. One simple method
      (AVPU) classiﬁes patients according to their response to stimulation:
      • Alert.
      • Responsive to Voice.
      • Responsive only to Pain.
      • Unresponsive.
      If a patient is unresponsive or responds only to pain, call for senior
      ED help and an ICU specialist or anaesthetist, since expert airway care
      (RSI, tracheal intubation and IPPV) will be needed.
      Monitoring
      Every head-injured patient requires regular neurological observations.
      These should include measurements of GCS, pupil response, limb power,
      pulse, BP and respiratory rate on a standard chart, such as the one shown
      in Fig. 8.7. This monitoring is critical if complications such as intracranial
      haematomas, ﬁts and hypovolaemia from other injuries are to be detected
      and treated at an early stage. Any deterioration in GCS is an emergency:
      re-examine the patient and correct identiﬁable problems promptly whilst
      obtaining urgent senior help.
                                            HEAD INJURY: TRIAGE AND MONITORING                         357

                                                   NAME
                                                                      UNIT No
                                                                      D. of B.
      NEUROLOGICAL OBSERVATION CHART                                  WARD

DATE                                                                              TIME

                Spontaneously           4                                        Eyes closed
       Eyes     To speech               3                                        by swelling
C      Open     To pain                 2                                        =C
O               None                    1
M              Oriented                 5                                        Endotracheal
A       Best Confused                   4                                        tube or
       verbal Inappropriate Words       3                                        Tracheostomy
      response Incomprehensible         2                                        =T
S              Sounds
               None                     1
C              Obey commends            6                                        Usually
A       Best Localise pain              5                                        records the
L      motor Normal Flexion             4                                        best arm
E     response Abnormal Flexion         3                                        response
               Extension to pain        2
               None                     1

                                    240
              1
                                    230                                          40
                                    220                                          39
              2                     210                                          38

                                                                                      Temperature °C
                                    200                                          37
                                    190                                          36
              3                     180                                          35
                                    170                                          34
                                    160                                          33
              4
                                    150                                          32
                                    140                                          31
              5                     130                                          30
                                    120
                      Blood         110
              6       pressure      100
                      and Pulse
                                     90
                      rate
              7                      80
                                     70
                                     60
              8                      50
                                     40
                      Respiration
                                     30
    Pupil
                                     26
    scale
    (m.m.)                           22
                                     18
                                     14
                                    10
                                     6

                   right     Size                                                + reacts
                             Reaction                                            – no reaction
    PUPILS
                   left      Size                                                c. eye closed
                             Reaction
L                 Normal power
I        A        Mild weakness
M                                                                                Record
         R        Severe weakness                                                right (R)
B
         M        Spastic flexion                                                and left (L)
         S        Extension                                                      separately if
M
O                 No response                                                    there is a
V                 Normal power                                                   difference
E        L                                                                       between the
                  Mild weakness
M        E                                                                       two sides.
                  Severe weakness
E        G
N                 Extension
         S
T                 No response

Fig. 8.7 An example of a neurological observation chart.
358    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Head injury: history
      It may be impossible to obtain a complete history from the patient,
      particularly if there was loss of consciousness and/or amnesia. Use all
      available sources of information, including friends and family, other
      witnesses, and the ambulance crew. Cover the following areas:
      Mechanism of injury
      Eliciting the exact mechanism of injury will provide an impression of the
      nature of the forces involved and the risk of subsequent complications.
      Consider the possibility that the head injury may have been preceded and
      caused by another medical problem (eg arrhythmia, epilepsy, diabetes).
      Time of injury
      This information is useful, but may not be known.
      Loss of consciousness/amnesia
      A period of unconsciousness implies a head injury of at least moderate
      severity. It can be difﬁcult to establish exactly how long unconsciousness
      lasted, particularly if there is associated amnesia. Document the length of
      amnesia (both before and after injury), but remember that the full extent
      of the amnesia may not become apparent until much later.
      Subsequent symptoms
      Some symptoms are relatively common after head injury (eg headache
      and vomiting)—many patients will complain of these without being
      directly asked. There are a number of other symptoms, however, which
      the patient may not mention unless speciﬁcally asked. Enquire about the
      following symptoms:
      • Headache.
      • Nausea and vomiting.
      • Limb weakness.
      • Paraesthesiae.
      • Diplopia.
      • Rhinorrhoea.
      • Otorrhoea.
      Past medical history
      Document pre-existing illnesses and symptoms, particularly those that may
      have caused the head injury (eg cardiac arrhythmias, epilepsy, diabetes),
      or might make the consequences more severe (eg bleeding tendency).
      Enquire about previous head injury (an old skull fracture visible on new
      X-rays may otherwise be confusing).
      Drug history
      Ask particularly about recent alcohol and other drug ingestion and
      whether or not the patient is taking anticoagulant drugs (eg warfarin).
      This is very important, since patients with bleeding disorders and/or on
      anticoagulants have a much higher risk of intracranial problems after head
      injury, often require CT and must be admitted to hospital (b p.366).
                                               HEAD INJURY: HISTORY      359

Social history
Before contemplating discharge of any head-injured patient, ﬁnd out if
there is a responsible adult at home, or if there is someone else with
whom the patient could go and stay.
Tetanus status
If there are any wounds, consider the need for tetanus prophylaxis.
360    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Head injury: examination
      Resuscitation proceeds with examination, according to problems identi-
      ﬁed in the primary survey. Follow initial brief neurological examination
      (GCS, pupil reactions, limb weakness) by deﬁnitive complete examination:
      Cervical spine injury
      Consider this possibility in all cases (see b p.320).
      Glasgow Coma Scale
      Determining the conscious level is a crucial part of the neurological examin-
      ation. The adult score ranges from a minimum of 3 to a maximum of 15 and
      is calculated as shown in Table 8.2. Repeated GCS recordings are a crucial
      part of monitoring the head injured patient. A fall in GCS indicates a poten-
      tially serious deterioration and mandates a search for correctable conditions.
      Vital signs
      Record pulse, BP, and respiratory rate.
      BMG
      This is essential in all patients with altered conscious level.
      Alcohol
      Record if the patient smells of alcoholic drinks but never assume d GCS is
      due to alcohol.
      Eye signs
      Document pupil size (in mm) and reaction to light. Unilateral pupillary
      dilatation may reﬂect orbital injury or oculomotor nerve compression
      due to i ICP (b p.354). Check for a full range of eye movements and
      the presence of diplopia or nystagmus. Look in the fundi, although
      papilloedema is a late sign of i ICP. If there is any suspicion of eye injury,
      measure VA (b p.534). In infants, check for retinal haemorrhages
      (b p.731).
      Scalp, face, and head
      Examine the cranial nerves and search for abnormal cerebellar signs
      (nystagmus, hypotonia, intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesia). Carefully
      record scalp, ear or facial injury. Examination of facial injuries is on
      b p.370.
      The limbs
      Check limb tone, power, sensation and reﬂexes. Abnormalities (eg
      hemiparesis) may result from the primary brain insult or be a consequence
      of a developing intracranial haematoma requiring urgent intervention.
      A stroke can cause a fall resulting in a head injury.
      Other injuries
      The presence of a head injury can render identiﬁcation of non-cranial
      injuries difﬁcult. Intra-abdominal injuries often co-exist with serious head
      injuries and are difﬁcult to detect; have a low threshold for FAST ± CT.
      In particular, relatively minor non-life-threatening orthopaedic injuries
      (eg ﬁnger dislocations, wrist fractures) are easily missed. Ensure full
      examination, including palpation of all limbs for possible injury.
                                             HEAD INJURY: EXAMINATION            361

Signs of base of skull fracture
This is often a clinical diagnosis. One or more of the following may be seen:
• Bilateral orbital bruising conﬁned to the orbital margin (‘panda eyes’).
• Subconjunctival haemorrhage (no posterior margin of bleeding seen).
• Haemotympanum or bleeding from the auditory meatus.
• CSF otorrhoea or rhinorrhoea (± anosmia). Fluid mixtures containing
  relatively similar quantities of blood and CSF will separate into a ‘double
  ring’ when dropped onto blotting paper.
• Battle’s sign: bruising over the mastoid process without local direct trauma
  follows petrous temporal bone fracture, but takes several days to appear.
Glasgow Coma Scale (adults)
The GCS assesses the level of consciousness by scoring three aspects of
the patient’s response and adding up the scores to reach a ﬁnal score.
 Table 8.2 Glasgow Coma Scale
 Eye response              open spontaneously                4
                           open to verbal command            3
                           open to pain                      2
                           no response                       1
 Verbal response           talking and orientated            5
                           confused/disorientated            4
                           inappropriate words               3
                           incomprehensible sounds           2
                           no response                       1
 Motor response            obeys commands                    6
                           localizes pain                    5
                           ﬂexion/withdrawal                 4
                           abnormal ﬂexion                   3
                           extension                         2
                           no response                       1
 Total (GCS)                                                 Range 3–15

Notes
• Record GCS in shorthand showing its component parts (for example,
  GCS 10/15 (E3, V2, M5) means that the patient opens eyes to verbal
  commands, speaks incomprehensible sounds, localizes a painful stimulus).
  Similarly, when communicating with other health professionals describe
  the total score (GCS) and list its components.
• Unconsciousness is generally taken to mean no eye response and GCS ≤8.
• ‘Abnormal ﬂexion’ implies decorticate rigidity; and ‘abnormal extension’
  implies decerebrate rigidity.
• The GCS is difﬁcult to apply to small children, but may be modiﬁed as
  outlined on b p.717.
362    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Head injury: imaging
      Traditional use of X-rays has largely been replaced by CT scanning; EDs
      in some countries have abandoned skull X-rays altogether, so be aware of
      local policies and protocols. In the UK, Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
      Network (SIGN) guidelines on the early management of patients with a
      head injury (www.sign.ac.uk) were updated in 2009. In England and Wales,
      National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guidance,
      published in 2007, is available at www.nice.org.uk
      The role of CT scanning
      CT scanning is used to identify and deﬁne the brain injury, especially
      intracranial haematomas amenable to surgical treatment. Ensure adequate
      resuscitation before transferring for CT scan. In many cases, this will
      include RSI, tracheal intubation, and IPPV. Always arrange for appropri-
      ately trained staff to accompany the patient to the CT scanner. When
      clinical features point strongly to an intracranial haematoma (eg the
      emergence of focal signs or a deteriorating GCS), discuss promptly with a
      neurosurgeon the beneﬁts of transferring the patient to a centre that has
      both CT scanning facilities and an emergency neurosurgical service.
      Indications for CT scan
      Request CT scan for any of the following (see www.nice.org.uk):
      • GCS <13/15 at any point since injury.
      • GCS 13–14/15 at 2hr post-injury.
      • Suspected open or depressed skull fracture.
      • Any sign of basal skull fracture.
      • Post-traumatic seizure.
      • Focal neurological deﬁcit.
      • >1 episode of vomiting (except in children <12 years, where clinical
        judgement is required).
      • Amnesia for >30min of events before impact*.
      • Loss of consciousness and/or amnesia combined with one of: age >65
        years, coagulopathy (including clotting disorder, anticoagulant drug
        treatment) or dangerous mechanism* (eg pedestrian hit by car, fall >1m
        or 5 steps).
      Most requests will be urgent (scan performed and interpreted within an
      hour), except for the two indications marked with an asterisk*, which if
      isolated, may allow CT scan to be obtained less urgently (within 8hr),
      depending upon locally agreed policy.
      Interpretation of CT scan
      CT scans must be assessed by someone with appropriate expertise.
      • Skull fractures are obvious, as is the degree of depression of fragments.
      • Intracranial haematomas may cause midline shift and take several forms:
        extradural haematomas (b p.365) appears as a high density (white)
        lens-shaped lesions. Subdurals conform more to the surface of the brain
        (b p.365). Extradural and subdural haematomas can co-exist.
      • Cerebral contusions appear as patches of low or mixed attenuation.
      • Cerebral swelling may take some time to develop, causing the ventricles
        to appear smaller than normal.
                                                        HEAD INJURY: IMAGING    363

Skull X-rays: rationale
Skull X-rays are quick, cheap, and easy to obtain but they should only be
used when CT scanning is not available in adult patients with minor head
injury who do not need an immediate CT scan. Standard views are: antero-
posterior (AP), lateral and Towne’s. They are useful to detect skull vault
fractures, but do not deﬁne any intracranial lesion. Identiﬁcation of skull
fractures has been traditionally held to be important because of the i risk
of intracranial haematoma, particularly if the conscious level is impaired
(see Table 8.3). If CT is planned, do not waste time doing skull X-rays.

 Table 8.3 Risks of operable intracranial haematoma after head injury
 GCS 15/15                Overall                              1 in 6000
 GCS 15/15                With no other features               1 in 31,300
 GCS 15/15                With post traumatic amnesia          1 in 6,700
 GCS 15/15                With skull fracture                  1 in 81
 GCS 15/15                With skull fracture and amnesia      1 in 29
 GCS 9–14/15              Overall                              1 in 51
 GCS 9–14/15              With no skull fracture               1 in 180
 GCS 9–14/15              With skull fracture                  1 in 5
 GCS 3–8/15               Overall                              1 in 7
 GCS 3–8/15               With no skull fracture               1 in 27
 GCS 3–8/15               With skull fracture                  1 in 4
 Adapted from Teasdale et al.

Indications for skull X-rays
Skull X-rays should no longer be used when CT scanning is immediately
available. If CT is not available, it can be used to identify adult patients
with skull vault fractures, who will then require transfer for CT scanning.
They have virtually no role now in the assessment of head injuries.
Interpretation of skull X-rays
It can be difﬁcult to distinguish fractures from vascular markings and
suture lines. If in doubt, examine the relevant part of the head for sign of
injury and seek a senior opinion. Linear fractures appear as sharp-edged
lucent lines, which have a different appearance from vascular markings.
Depressed fractures take various forms, but tangential views may demon-
strate the depressed bone. Base of skull fractures are often not visible, but
there may be indirect evidence in the form of an intracranial aerocoele or
ﬂuid (air/blood) level in a sinus. Check each of the main sinuses (frontal,
sphenoidal, maxillary) in turn, remembering that the lateral skull X-ray is
usually obtained with the patient lying supine (‘horizontal beam’, ie occiput
downwards). This will affect the orientation of the ﬂuid level.
364    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Management of serious head injury
      Tailor management according to the needs of each individual patient.
      Initial management
      • Clear, establish and maintain the airway, provide O2 and protect the
        cervical spine (b p.320).
      • Check breathing—provide support with bag/valve/mask device as
        necessary. Examine for and treat any serious chest injury.
      • Check BMG and treat hypoglycaemia if present (b p.322).
      • Insert two large IV cannulae and send blood for X-matching, FBC,
        clotting screen, U&E, and glucose.
      • Correct hypovolaemia, resuscitate, and treat other injuries.
      • If GCS ≤ 8/15, the patient will require urgent airway protection with RSI,
        tracheal intubation and IPPV (see b p.312). Call for senior ED help and
        request help from ICU and/or anaesthesia. Check ABG and ventilate to
        pCO2 of ≈4.5kPa.
      • Liaise early with an anaesthetist, ICU and a neurosurgeon (see below).
      • Contact a radiologist early to arrange a CT scan with minimum delay.
      • In the multiply or seriously injured patient who will require a CT
        scan, concerns of opioid drugs masking pupillary signs are less important
        than ensuring adequate analgesia. Give titrated IV opioid analgesia
        (b p.320), after recording GCS, pupil reactions, and basic neurological
        examination.
      • Give IV antibiotics for patients with compound skull fractures.
        Cefuroxime 1.5g IV is a suitable choice, but be guided by local policy.
        Regional neurosurgical centres vary as to whether or not they advise
        prophylactic antibiotics for clinical base of skull fracture (there is no
        compelling evidence that they prevent meningitis): follow local policy.
      • Clean and close scalp wounds to control scalp bleeding (use simple
        interrupted silk sutures for rapid closure), but do not allow this to
        unduly delay CT scan or neurosurgical transfer.
      • Insert a urinary catheter.
      • Consider the need for an orogastric tube. Avoid using NG tubes in
        facial injury or any possibility of base of skull fracture.
      • Consider the need for tetanus immunization.
      Indications for neurosurgical referral
      • CT shows a recent intracranial lesion.
      • Patient fulﬁls the criteria for CT scan, but this cannot be done within an
        appropriate period of time.
      • Persisting coma (GCS < 9/15) after initial resuscitation.
      • Confusion which persists >4hrs.
      • Deterioration in conscious level after admission (a sustained drop of
        one point on the motor or verbal subscales, or two points on the eye
        opening subscale of the GCS).
      • Progressive focal neurological signs.
      • Seizure without full recovery.
      • Depressed skull fracture.
      • Deﬁnite or suspected penetrating injury.
      • CSF leak or other sign of a basal fracture.
                             MANAGEMENT OF SERIOUS HEAD INJURY                  365

Treating complications
Early recognition and treatment of complications is essential to prevent
secondary brain damage. It is crucially important to prevent hypoxia and
hypovolaemia adding to the primary cerebral insult.
Seizures
Check BMG, glucose, and ABG. Treat with IV lorazepam 4mg. Repeat
this once if not initially effective. Start an IV phenytoin infusion (loading
dose 10–15mg/kg IV over 30min with ECG monitoring) to prevent further
ﬁts. Fits which continue for ≥10−15min or recur despite this treatment
require senior ED and ICU help, RSI, tracheal intubation, and IPPV.
Deteriorating conscious level
Having corrected hypoxia, hypercapnia and hypovolaemia, a diminishing
conscious level is likely to reﬂect intracranial pathology, leading to i ICP,
requiring urgent investigation and treatment. Bradycardia, hypertension,
and a dilating pupil are very late signs of i ICP. Speed is of the essence.
Liaise with a neurosurgeon who will advise on use of agents to d ICP
(eg a bolus of 0.5g/kg IV mannitol—typically 200mL of 20% for an adult).
Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic which may temporarily d ICP and ‘buy time’
to get the patient to theatre for drainage of an intracranial haematoma.
Other examples of deterioration requiring urgent reassessment
• The development of agitation or abnormal behaviour.
• The development of severe or increasing headache or persistent vomiting.
• New or evolving neurological symptoms/signs (eg limb weakness).
Intracranial haematoma
Causes of neurological deterioration after head injury include hypoxia,
hypovolaemia, seizures, cerebral swelling, and intracranial haematomas.
Intracranial haematomas are important, as prompt surgery may save lives.
Patients with bleeding disorders or on anticoagulants have a greatly i risk
of developing an intracranial haematoma after head injury.
Extradural haematoma
Classically, extradural haematoma follows bleeding from the middle
meningeal artery’s anterior branch after temporal bone fracture. Texts
describe head injury with initial loss of consciousness, then return to full
consciousness, before neurological deterioration as intracranial bleeding
continues and ICP i. However, many patients deviate from classical ‘talk
and die’ descriptions: extradural haemorrhage may occur in non-temporal
areas, with no skull fracture and no initial loss of consciousness.
Subdural haematoma
Bridging vein bleeding between brain and dura causes subdural
haematoma. Unlike extradural haematoma (which is separated from brain
surface by the dura), subdural haematoma conforms to the brain surface.
This helps distinguish extradural from subdural haematoma on CT.
Subdural haematoma may be acute or chronic. Acute subdural haematoma
is associated with a severe brain insult. Chronic subdural haematoma often
occurs in elderly and alcoholics (i risk perhaps due to cerebral atrophy).
Chronic subdural haematoma develops over several days, often presenting
with ﬂuctuating conscious level, sometimes with an obscure (or even no)
history of head injury.
366    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Minor head injury
      Introduction
      Assessment and management of patients who have sustained relatively
      minor primary brain insults can be difﬁcult. This is especially true when
      assessment is rendered awkward by virtue of age, epilepsy, drug, or
      alcohol ingestion. In these circumstances, adopt a cautious approach and
      admit the patient for observation until the picture becomes clearer.
      Golden rules for managing head injury are:
      • Never attribute a d GCS to alcohol alone.
      • Never discharge a head-injured patient to go home alone.
      • Admit patients with head injury and coexisting bleeding tendency
        (including those taking anticoagulant drugs).
      Differential diagnosis
      Consider whether another condition could be principally responsible for
      the patient’s symptoms. For example, small children who vomit after head
      injury may be suffering from otitis media or a throat infection. Otitis media
      may be responsible for both the vomiting (with fever) and for the head
      injury (by causing unsteadiness of gait, resulting in a fall).
      Indications for admission
      • d GCS (ie <15/15), neurological deﬁcit or post-traumatic seizure.
      • Signiﬁcant neurological symptoms (severe headache, vomiting, irrita-
        bility or abnormal behaviour, continuing amnesia >5min after injury).
      • Signiﬁcant medical problems, particularly bleeding tendency (including
        inherited diseases and anticoagulant drugs).
      • Inability to assess due to epilepsy, consumption of alcohol or drugs.
      • Clinical or radiological evidence of skull fracture.
      • No one available at home or no safe home to go to (including suspected
        NAI and domestic violence).
      Observation of those admitted
      All patients require regular neurological observations (see b p.356). Act
      promptly if conscious level d or neurological deﬁcit develops. Remember
      that one of the principal reasons for admitting patients with apparently
      minor head injuries is to monitor for the development of intracranial
      problems. In these cases, resuscitate, liaise with a neurosurgeon and
      obtain an urgent CT scan.
      If after 12–24hr of observation, the patient is symptom-free, haemo-
      dynamically stable and is GCS 15/15 with no neurological deﬁcit, it is
      reasonable to consider discharge. Patients who do not fall into this category
      (ie symptomatic, d GCS or neurological deﬁcit) require a CT scan.
                                                                   MINOR HEAD INJURY         367

Discharging patients
Most of the patients who present with minor head injury can be safely
discharged directly from the ED. Ensure that there is a responsible adult
available to accompany them home and someone to stay with them for
24hr once they get home. Warn the patient and the accompanying adult
of the potential problems following a head injury (Box 8.1)—and what
to do if any of these problems are experienced. Give advice regarding
analgesia. Most EDs have standard written instructions which are given
to the patient and accompanying adult. Examples of head injury warning
instructions are shown below.

Box 8.1 An example of head injury warning instructions
Adults
• Ensure a responsible person is available to keep an eye on you for the
  next 24hr and show them this card.
• Rest for the next 24hr.
• Do take painkillers such as paracetamol to relieve pain and headache.
• DO NOT drink alcohol for the next 24hr.
• DO take your normal medication, but DO NOT take sleeping tablets
  or tranquilizers without consulting your doctor ﬁrst.
• If any of the following symptoms occur then you should return or be
  brought back to the hospital or telephone the hospital immediately.
  Tel (01***)****** (24hr):
    • headache not relieved by painkillers such as paracetamol;
    • vomiting;
    • disturbance of vision;
    • problems with balance;
    • ﬁts;
    • patient becomes unrousable.
Children
• Your child has sustained a head injury and following a thorough
  examination we are satisﬁed that the injury is not serious.
• Your child may be more tired than normal.
• Allow him/her to sleep if he/she wants to.
• Give Calpol® or Disprol® (paediatric paracetamol) for any pain or
  headache.
• Try to keep your child resting for 24hr.
• If your child should develop any of the following:
    • headache not relieved by paediatric paracetamol;
    • vomiting;
    • altered vision;
    • irritability;
    • ﬁts;
    • becomes unrousable.
• Bring him/her back to the hospital or telephone for advice
  immediately: Tel (01***)****** (24hr).
Alternative suggested written advice is available from the National Institute for Clinical
   Excellence (www.nice.org.uk).
368    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Post-concussion symptoms
      Presentation
      Post-concussion symptoms are common after head injury and cause much
      anxiety in patients and their relatives. The most frequent complaints are:
      • Headache.
      • Dizziness.
      • Lethargy.
      • Depression.
      • Inability to concentrate.
      Headaches occur in most patients admitted to hospital after head injuries:
      in ≈30% the headaches persist for >2 months. The headaches are usually
      intermittent and become worse during the day or on exertion. Some
      appear to be ‘tension headaches’ and are often not signiﬁcantly helped by
      analgesics. Migraine attacks may become more frequent or severe after a
      head injury. Headaches that do not ﬁt these patterns may reﬂect serious
      intracranial pathology.
      Non-speciﬁc dizziness is common after concussion. Detailed questioning
      may distinguish dizziness from vertigo due to disturbance of the vestibular
      mechanisms. Dizziness may be caused by postural hypotension or by
      drugs (eg co-codamol and other analgesics) or alcohol (to which patients
      are often more sensitive after a head injury).
      Diagnosis
      Post-concussion symptoms are diagnosed by exclusion of other problems
      or complications following head injury. Take a careful history, including
      questions about drowsiness, intellectual function, neck pain, photophobia,
      vomiting, and rhinorrhoea.
      Examine the patient for any speciﬁc cause of the symptoms and for any
      neurological deﬁcit. Look particularly for evidence of meningitis or an
      intracranial haematoma. Check for papilloedema.
      Elderly or alcoholic patients or those with a bleeding tendency are prone
      to develop chronic subdural haematomas, which may cause confusion or
      intellectual deterioration, often without localizing signs. Obtain a CT.
      Treatment
      After a careful history and examination, with appropriate investigations
      to exclude other problems, reassure the patient and explain that the
      symptoms are likely to resolve gradually. Reduced short-term memory
      and impaired concentration may make it difﬁcult for a patient to return
      to work and cause additional stress and anxiety: give suitable explanations
      and discuss the provision of a sick note with the GP.
      Follow-up
      Since symptoms may last for some time, arrange appropriate follow-up.
      This usually involves the GP, who needs to be kept fully informed of the
      clinical ﬁndings and diagnosis.
This page intentionally left blank
370    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Maxillofacial injuries: introduction
      These injuries often look dramatic and can be life-threatening as well as
      causing signiﬁcant long-term morbidity.
      Common causes are road trafﬁc collisions, assaults, and sport.
      Emergency resuscitative measures
      • Perform a rapid initial assessment to look for and treat airway obstruc-
        tion or major bleeding (b p.320). Remember the possibility of an
        associated neck injury. Blood may rapidly accumulate in the pharynx
        requiring anterior ± posterior nasal packing for control (b p.552).
      • Management of airway obstruction is complex, intubation often difﬁcult
        and occasionally a surgical airway is required: obtain experienced ED
        and anaesthetic assistance early. Use jaw thrust, chin lift, and suction to
        establish a patent airway.
      • With bilateral mandibular fractures, the tongue may fall backwards.
        Restore airway patency by pulling the fractured segment anteriorly or
        by inserting a large (0 silk) suture in the tongue and pulling anteriorly.
      • Maxillary fractures may be displaced far enough backwards to compromise
        the airway by contact of the soft palate against the posterior pharyngeal
        wall. This can be relieved by hooking two ﬁngers behind the hard palate,
        and pulling forwards and upwards, but this can produce considerable
        bleeding.
      History
      Important clues may be obtained from knowing the causative events both
      in relation to the facial injury itself and also of injury to the head, spine etc.
      Drug history (eg anticoagulants or bleeding tendency) may be important.
      Examination
      Inspect the face from the front, side and above (by standing above and
      behind the patient). Look for:
      • Asymmetry.
      • Flattening of the cheek (depressed zygomatic fracture).
      • ‘Dish face’ deformity (ﬂattened elongated face due to posterior and
        downward displacement of the maxilla).
      • Nasal deviation or saddle deformity. Measure the intercanthal distance:
        if >3.5cm suspect naso-ethmoidal fracture—see below.
      • Uneven pupillary levels (due to orbital ﬂoor fracture).
      • CSF rhinorrhoea (causes ‘tramline’ effect with central CSF and blood
        either side).
      • Subconjunctival haemorrhage without a posterior border (suggests an
        orbital wall or anterior cranial fossa fracture).
      Palpate the facial bones systematically. Start over the superior orbital
      margins. Work down feeling both sides at the same time checking for
      pain, deformity, crepitus and movement. Feel speciﬁcally for steps in the
      inferior orbital margin and zygoma. Subcutaneous emphysema implies a
      compound fracture—often of the maxillary sinus.
                           MAXILLOFACIAL INJURIES: INTRODUCTION                 371

Check for hypo/anaesthesia of the cheek, side of the nose and upper lip
(infra-orbital nerve injury), and for numbness of the upper teeth (anterior
superior alveolar nerve in the infra-orbital canal), and lower teeth and lip
(inferior dental nerve damage due to mandibular fracture).
Examine inside the mouth, checking for dental malocclusion (ie the teeth
do not meet together properly when the mouth is closed), loose, or lost
teeth (this may need CXR), bruising and bleeding.
Examine the eyes carefully (b p.536): assume any laceration below the
medial canthus involves the lacrimal duct until proven otherwise.
Investigations
In patients with multiple injuries, imaging of the chest, pelvis and cervical
spine will take precedence. Even with ‘isolated’ facial injuries, perform
imaging of the cervical spine and head, where indicated, before facial
X-rays or CT scanning.
Facial X-rays are often both difﬁcult to perform (because of poor patient
cooperation) and difﬁcult to interpret. Get maxillofacial specialist advice
regarding the views required and their interpretation. CT scanning is often
required prior to deﬁnitive maxillofacial surgery.
The commonly required views include:
• Occipitomental 10°, 30°, and 45°.
• Lateral.
• Orthopantomogram (for mandible).
Treatment
Treatment of speciﬁc facial fractures is considered in b p.372, b
p.374, b p.376. Remember that even in the absence of a visible fracture
on X-ray, patients in whom there is clinical suspicion of facial fracture
(swelling, tenderness, asymmetry, numbness, etc.) require expert attention
and/or follow-up.
372    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Middle third facial fractures
      Dento-alveolar fractures
      These injuries involve only the teeth and their bony support. Look for
      deranged occlusion and stepped malalignment of teeth, bruising of gums,
      and palpable fracture in the buccal sulcus.
      Le Fort facial fractures (Fig. 8.8)
      These lie between the frontal bone, the skull base and mandible. They
      involve the upper jaw, teeth, nose, maxillary, and ethmoid air sinuses
      • Le Fort I involves the tooth-bearing portion of the maxilla. Look for
        lengthening of the face due to the dropped maxillary segment. There
        may be movement or a split of the hard palate, a haematoma of the soft
        palate/buccal sulcus, and malocclusion.
      • Le Fort II involves the maxilla, nasal bones and the medial aspects of
        the orbits. Look for a ‘dished-in’ face, a step in the infra-orbital margin,
        infra-orbital nerve damage, malocclusion and surgical emphysema.
        The maxilla may be ﬂoating—if the upper teeth are pulled (gently!)
        the maxilla may move forward. Check for epistaxis, CSF rhinorrhoea,
        diplopia, and subconjunctival haematoma. Facial swelling occurs rapidly
        and is often severe. Later, bilateral peri-orbital bruising may be evident.
      • Le Fort III involves the maxilla, zygoma, nasal bones, ethmoid and the
        small bones of the base of the skull. The entire midface is fractured from
        the base of the skull. Features include those of type II plus: ﬂattened
        zygomatic bones (which may be mobile and tender), steps over the
        fronto-zygomatic sutures, movement and deformity of the zygomatic
        arch, and different pupillary levels. There is usually severe facial swelling
        and bruising. Pharyngeal bleeding may severely compromise the airway
        and cause hypovolaemic shock.
      Le Fort fractures may be asymmetrical (eg Le Fort II on the right and III on
      the left).
      Naso-ethmoidal fractures
      These produce a ﬂattened nasal bridge with splaying of the nasal complex,
      saddle-shaped deformity of the nose, traumatic telecanthus, periorbital
      bruising, subconjunctival haematoma, epistaxis, CSF rhinorrhea, and
      supraorbital or supratrochlear nerve paraesthesia.
      Management of middle third facial fractures
      • Resuscitate and establish a clear airway as described on b p.324.
      • Refer dentoalveolar fractures for repositioning and immobilization with
        acrylic/metal splints ± wiring.
      • Refer all patients with middle third or naso-ethmoidal fractures to the
        maxillofacial surgeons for admission. Any continuing haemorrhage
        requires packing—leave this to the specialist. Tell the patient not to blow
        the nose (i subcutaneous emphysema and may drive bacteria into fracture
        sites and intracranially). Prophylactic antibiotics are often advised by
        maxillofacial surgeons. Ensure tetanus prophylaxis (b p.410).
      • Discuss patients with CSF leaks with the neurosurgeons.
      • Clean and dress compound facial lacerations, but do not close them
        (unless actively bleeding); they may need formal debridement and they
        provide access to fractures for open reduction and internal ﬁxation.
                                           MIDDLE THIRD FACIAL FRACTURES   373

             Le Fort III

             Le Fort II
             Le Fort I

Fig. 8.8 Le Fort classiﬁcation of facial fractures.
374    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Zygomatic, orbital and frontal
      sinus fractures
      Zygomatic (malar) fractures
      These injuries are usually due to a direct blow and are frequently
      associated with severe eye injuries. ‘Tripod fractures’ involve fractures
      through the zygomatico-temporal and zygomatico-frontal sutures, and the
      infra-orbital foramen.
      Examination Look for ﬂattening of the cheek (often obscured later by
      swelling), a palpable defect in the infra-orbital margin, infra-orbital nerve
      damage, diplopia, and subconjunctival haemorrhage (especially if no
      posterior margin is seen). Isolated fractures of the zygomatic arch may be
      accompanied by a palpable defect over the arch and limited or painful jaw
      movement resulting from interference with the normal movement of the
      coronoid process of the mandible.
      Orbital ‘blow-out’ fractures
      Caused by a direct blow to the globe of the eye (commonly from a squash
      ball or shuttlecock) resulting in a fracture of the orbital ﬂoor and prolapse
      of contents into the maxillary sinus.
      Examination Check for diplopia due to inferior rectus entrapment
      (the patient cannot look up and medially), enophthalmos, and surgical
      emphysema. Carefully check the eye itself for injury (hyphaema, retinal
      detachment, glaucoma, blindness). Record the visual acuity. Test infra-
      orbital nerve function. Fractures of the ﬂoor of the orbit may not be
      easily visible on X-ray, but can often be inferred by the soft tissue mass in
      the roof of the maxillary sinus (‘tear drop’ sign), clouding of the sinus and
      surgical emphysema.
      Management of zygomatic and orbital fractures
      • Tell the patient not to blow his/her nose.
      • Refer all patients (including those in whom a fracture is clinically
        suspected but not evident on X-ray) to maxillofacial specialists who
        will advise regarding prophylactic antibiotics and will arrange further
        investigation (usually CT scanning) and treatment.
      • Involve the ophthalmologists if the eye is also injured.
      Note: Patients with orbital emphysema who complain of sudden d in
      vision may be suffering from a build-up of air under pressure which is
      compromising retinal blood ﬂow. These patients need emergency
      decompression.
      Frontal sinus fractures
      Presenting features include supraorbital swelling, tenderness and
      crepitus, occasionally with supraorbital nerve anaesthesia. CT scanning
      will determine whether or not there are fractures of simply the anterior
      wall or of both anterior and posterior sinus walls (± depressed fragments).
      Give IV antibiotics and refer for admission and observation, which in the
      case of depressed fragments, should be to the neurosurgical team.
This page intentionally left blank
376    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Mandibular injuries
      Considerable force is required to fracture the mandible, so look for
      concurrent head or other injuries. The mandible may be fractured at a site
      distant from the point of impact (eg a fall on the chin may cause condylar
      fractures). There are often fractures at two or more sites (Fig. 8.9). The
      temporomandibular joint may be dislocated or the condyle driven through
      the temporal bone causing a skull base fracture.
      Symptoms and signs
      The patient usually presents with pain (aggravated by jaw movement
      or biting). Check for swelling, tenderness, or steps on palpation of the
      mandible. Look for malocclusion, loose or missing teeth, and intra-oral
      bruising. Numbness of the lower lip indicates injury to the inferior dental
      nerve where it passes through the ramus of the mandible.
      X-rays
      Request an orthopantomogram (OPG). Temporomandibular joint
      dislocation and condylar fractures are best shown by condylar views.
      Management
      Simple undisplaced single fractures not involving the teeth can be treated
      with analgesia, soft diet, prophylactic antibiotics (eg penicillin or co-amoxiclav),
      tetanus cover, and referral to the maxillofacial outpatient department. Refer
      displaced or multiple fractures to the on-call specialist.
      Refer to the on-call specialist patients with bilateral condyle fractures or
      single fractures with malocclusion or deviation of the jaw on opening.
      Advise patients with unilateral asymptomatic fractures to take a soft diet
      and arrange outpatient follow-up.
      Temporomandibular joint dislocation
      This is almost invariably anterior, but can be uni- or bilateral. It may be
      caused by a direct blow to the (often open) jaw, or in patients with lax
      joint capsule/ligaments by yawning, eating, dystonic reactions or intubation.
      The patient cannot close the mouth, the jaw protrudes anteriorly and
      difﬁculty in swallowing leads to drooling of saliva. The pain is often over
      the temporal fossa, rather than the temporomandibular joint itself. Obtain
      X-rays only if there is a history of direct trauma.
      Treatment If seen shortly after dislocation, reduction can usually be achieved
      simply and without anaesthesia or sedation (Fig. 8.10). Explain the process to
      the patient. Sit in front of him/her and with your gloved thumb(s) protected
      by a gauze swab press down and backwards on the lower molar teeth,
      while gently cupping and lifting the chin with the ﬁngers. After reduction
      advise the patient to take a soft diet, and not to yawn (difﬁcult!) or open
      the mouth widely for 24hr. Delayed presentations can be associated with
      muscle spasm requiring anaesthesia and muscle relaxants.
                                                     MANDIBULAR INJURIES   377

                                                             Neck

                                                             Ramus

                                                  Angle
                             Body
Fig. 8.9 Common fracture sites of the mandible.

Fig. 8.10 Reduction of dislocated temporomandibular joint.
378    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Penetrating neck trauma
      In the UK, neck ‘stabbings’ and ‘slashings’ are not uncommon, but gunshot
      wounds to the neck are rare. The neck is divided into ‘zones’ when classifying
      wounds.
      • Zone 1 extends from the clavicles to the cricoid cartilage.
      • Zone 2 extends from the cricoid to the angle of the mandible.
      • Zone 3 is the area from the angle of the mandible to the skull base.
      Initial assessment and resuscitation
      Every patient requires high ﬂow O2, wide bore venous access (send blood
      for X-matching) and resuscitation according to an evaluation of the airway
      and cervical spine, breathing and circulation. Quickly check for evidence
      of spinal cord injury. Do not aim to raise the BP too high; a systolic of
      ≈90mmHg is sufﬁcient if the patient is conscious. Look for and rapidly
      treat the following:
      • Direct airway injury—may need emergency surgical airway (b p.326).
      • Tension pneumothorax (b p.328).
      • Major external haemorrhage—apply pressure to the wound.
      • Massive haemothorax (b p.335).
      Occasionally the open end of a cut trachea will be seen in extensive neck
      wounds; secure the airway temporarily by passing an ET or tracheostomy
      tube into the lumen and securing the tube carefully. Further management
      depends partially upon haemodynamic status:
      The unstable patient
      Haemodynamic instability may be due to tension pneumothorax or
      massive haemothorax. Persistent major bleeding from a neck wound
      (usually Zone 2) associated with haemodynamic instability is an indication
      for emergency surgical exploration in theatre. Other indications for
      exploration include:
      • Breach of platysma (do not probe or explore the wound in the ED).
      • Evidence of vascular injury (haemorrhage, expanding haematoma).
      • Evidence of surgical emphysema (indicates laryngeal or oesophageal
        disruption which requires repair).
      The stable patient
      Many patients are stable and have little evidence of signiﬁcant injury.
      • Provide O2, secure venous access, and send blood for group and save.
      • Monitor SpO2, pulse, BP, and respiratory rate.
      • Obtain a CXR (to exclude pneumothorax/haemothorax).
      • Provide IV analgesia as required (see b p.320).
      • Consider tetanus status and the need for prophylactic antibiotics
        (eg 1.5g IV cefuroxime—according to local policy).
      • Investigations may include cervical spine X-rays and/or CT neck.
      • Occasionally 4-vessel angiography or duplex ultrasound scanning (to
        exclude vascular injury) and a contrast swallow/oesophagoscopy (to
        exclude oesophageal injury) are required (usually Zone 1 or 3 injuries).
      • Refer all patients to ENT or maxillofacial surgeons for admission, obser-
        vation, formal wound cleaning, exploration and closure.
      • Carefully document the size, position and other features of the neck
        wound, in view of the high medicolegal signiﬁcance (b p.403).
This page intentionally left blank
380    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Spine and spinal cord injury: 1
      Consider the possibility of spinal injury when managing every injured
      patient. Careless manipulation or movement can cause additional spinal
      injury. Maintain a particularly high index of suspicion and provide spinal
      immobilization in patients with:
      • Major trauma.
      • ‘Minor’ trauma with spinal pain and/or neurological symptoms/signs.
      • Altered consciousness after injury.
      • A mechanism of injury with a possibility of spinal injury (eg road trafﬁc
         collision, high fall, diving, and rugby injuries).
      • Pre-existing spinal disease (eg rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spond-
         ylitis, severe osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, steroid therapy), as serious
         fractures or dislocations may follow apparently minor trauma.
      The commonest sites of spinal injury are the cervical spine and the
      thoracolumbar junction.
      Airway management and spinal immobilization
      These two aspects demand immediate attention in any patient with
      possible spinal injury—manage them together. The neck is the commonest
      site of cord injury. If immobilization is not achieved with unstable injuries,
      it is the site at which most additional cord or nerve root damage can be
      produced.
      • Perform manual immobilization rapidly (without traction), keeping the
         head and neck in the neutral position, by placing both hands around the
         neck and interlocking them behind, with the forearms preventing head
         movement (see Fig. 8.11).
      • Apply a hard collar with continued manual stabilization or support with
         sand bags placed on either side of the head and tape applied to the
         forehead to prevent rotation. The collar should ﬁt securely, but not
         occlude the airway or impair venous return from the head. Take care
         in patients with pre-existing neck deformity (eg ankylosing spondylitis—
         b p.497) not to manipulate the neck or to force the collar into place.
      • Ensure airway patency and adequate ventilation—hypoxia compromises
         an injured cord. Initially in an unconscious patient, jaw thrust and suction
         to the upper airway can be used. Remember that oropharyngeal stimu-
         lation can provoke severe bradyarrhythmias. Simple airway adjuncts
         such as oro- and nasopharyngeal airways often maintain upper airway
         patency, but sometimes tracheal intubation is required. This must be
         performed by an individual experienced in advanced anaesthetic tech-
         niques (usually RSI, rarely ﬁbre-optic) with an assistant controlling the
         head/neck to limit cervical spine movement.
      • Ventilation can deteriorate due to cord oedema/ischaemia, so look
         regularly for diaphragmatic breathing (diaphragm is supplied by C3/4/5)
         and the use of accessory muscles of respiration. Use pulse oximetry and
         regular ABG analysis to conﬁrm adequate oxygenation and ventilation.
         Tracheal intubation and controlled ventilation may be required.
      • Usually, patients will have been transported on a spinal board, which
         should be removed as soon as the primary survey is completed and
         resuscitation commenced (Fig. 8.12). Remove the board before imaging
         if possible.
                                        SPINE AND SPINAL CORD INJURY: 1   381

Suspect spinal injury in patients with d consciousness if there is:
• Flaccid arreﬂexia.
• d Anal tone on PR examination.
• Diaphragmatic breathing.
• An ability to ﬂex (C5/6), but not to extend (C6/7) the elbow.
• Response to painful stimulus above, but not below the clavicle.
• Hypotension with associated bradycardia.
• Priapism.

Fig. 8.11 Manual immobilization of the neck.

Fig. 8.12 Co-ordinated 4 person lift.
382    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Spine and spinal cord injury: 2
      Managing the circulation
      Monitor ECG and BP. Interruption of the sympathetic system in the cord
      causes loss of vasomotor tone, with vasodilatation, i venous pooling,
      and d BP. Flaccidity and arreﬂexia, together with the absence of a reﬂex
      tachycardia or an associated (inappropriate) bradycardia are pointers to
      this, but before diagnosing ‘neurogenic shock’ exclude and treat other
      causes of hypotension (eg blood loss, tension pneumothorax). IV ﬂuids
      (b p.320) usually correct any relative hypovolaemia, but inotropes may be
      needed if d cardiac output persists despite adequate volume replacement
      and correction of bradyarrhythmias by atropine. Use CVP monitoring of
      patients in neurogenic shock to prevent ﬂuid overload.
      Other considerations
      Insert a urinary catheter (strict aseptic technique) to monitor urine output
      and prevent bladder distension. If there is no craniofacial injury, an NG
      tube will prevent gastric distension (ileus commonly develops after cord
      injury), and d risk of aspiration and respiratory embarrassment.
      With blunt injury mechanisms, up to two-thirds of individuals with spinal
      cord injury have major injuries at other sites. Conscious patients can
      usually describe a sensory level and paralysis, with pain at the level of
      the vertebral injury. Have a high index of suspicion for thoracic/abdominal
      injury—clinical features may be obscured by sensory or motor deﬁcits
      from the cord injury itself. Abdominal distension may occur and there may
      be no signs of peritonism. FAST (USS), CT, or DPL may be required.
      Neurological examination
      Carefully perform and document the neurological examination, including
      light touch and pinprick sensation, proprioception, muscle power, tone,
      co-ordination, and deep tendon reﬂexes. Evidence of distal, motor, or
      sensory function implies an incomplete lesion and hence the possibility
      of recovery. The accuracy of this baseline examination is important,
      since cephalad progression of abnormalities is a sensitive marker of
      deterioration, and in the cervical region, may lead to respiratory failure.
      Document muscle group strength in upper and lower limbs using the 0–5
      grading system (see Table 8.4). It is standard practice to record the most
      caudal location which has intact (normal) motor and sensory function.
      Examine the perineum and perform a PR examination; look for voluntary
      contraction and anal tone. An intact bulbocavernosus reﬂex (squeezing
      glans penis l contraction of bulbocavernosus muscle—S2,3,4) and anal
      cutaneous reﬂex (scratching peri-anal skin l anal contraction—S4,5)
      imply sacral sparing.
      Spinal examination
      Log-roll the patient. The person controlling the head and neck directs
      movement. Carefully examine for tenderness, step-deformity, gibbus,
      widening of interspinous gaps and prominence of spinous processes. There
      may not be overlying tenderness with vertebral body fractures. Remove
      any debris from under the patient. Keep the patient covered and warm, as
      d sympathetic vasomotor tone l i risk of hypothermia. To d risk of pressure
      sores, remove the patient rapidly from the spinal board.
                                     SPINE AND SPINAL CORD INJURY: 2             383

Table 8.4 Grading muscle strength
Grading of muscle power
0                      Total paralysis
1                      Palpable or visible contraction
2                      Movement with gravity eliminated
3                      Movement against gravity
4                      Weaker than usual
5                      Normal strength
Muscles supplied by various nerve roots
C5                     Shoulder abductor (deltoid)
C6                     Wrist extensors (extensor carpi radialis)
C7                     Elbow extensor (triceps)
C8                     Middle ﬁnger ﬂexor (ﬂexor digitorum profundus)
T1                     Little ﬁnger abductor (abductor digiti minimi)
L2                     Hip ﬂexors (iliopsoas)
L3                     Knee extensors (quadriceps)
L4                     Ankle dorsiﬂexors (tibialis anterior)
L5                     Big toe extensor (extensor hallucis longus)
S1                     Ankle plantar ﬂexors (soleus, gastrocnemius)

Incomplete cord injury patterns
There are several recognized patterns of incomplete spinal cord injury.
Although the resultant physical signs can be predicted from a detailed
knowledge of neuroanatomy, bear in mind that some patients present
with an atypical injury and therefore an atypical pattern of injury.
Anterior cord syndrome Loss of power and pain sensation below the
injury, with preservation of touch and proprioception.
Posterior cord syndrome Loss of sensation, but power preserved.
Brown-Séquard syndrome Hemisection of the cord producing ipsilateral
paralysis and sensory loss below the injury, with contralateral loss of pain
and temperature. This syndrome occurs more frequently after penetrating
injury than after closed injury.
Central cervical cord syndrome Typically seen in elderly patients following
extension injuries to the neck, with degenerative changes being the only
X-ray abnormality. It is characterized by incomplete tetraparesis, which
affects the upper limbs more than the lower limbs (as nerves supplying the
upper limbs lie more centrally within the cord). Sensory deﬁcits are variable.
Spinal cord injury without radiographic abnormality
A signiﬁcant proportion of children with spinal cord injury have no
radiographic abnormality. The extent of both the neurological deﬁcit and
recovery is variable. Adults may similarly have spinal cord injury due to
traumatic herniation of an intervertebral disc, epidural haematoma or
ligamentous instability, yet plain radiographs may appear normal.
384    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Spine and spinal cord injury: 3
      Imaging (for indications for cervical spine X-rays see b p.462) X-rays
      are readily available, but interpretation can be difﬁcult. Whenever possible
      get senior expert help. Cord injury can occur without X-ray abnormality.
      This may be due to i soft tissue elasticity allowing excessive movement
      (children), or cord compression from disc prolapse (younger patients), or
      vascular involvement, or spondylosis (older patients).
      Cervical spine Request AP, lateral (must show C7/T1 junction) and open-
      mouth odontoid peg views if CT of the cervical spine is not indicated.
      Displacement (subluxation/dislocation) and fractures of vertebral bodies,
      spinous processes, and peg are best seen on lateral view. Unifacet
      dislocation causes anterior displacement ≤50% of AP diameter of
      vertebral body. Displacement >50% suggests bilateral facet dislocation.
      Look for swelling of prevertebral soft tissues.
      AP views show injuries to the pedicles, facets, and lateral masses.
      Open-mouth odontoid view usually demonstrates peg fractures.
      Flexion/extension views to assess neck stability are rarely indicated soon
      after injury, as muscle spasm may inhibit movement and there is potential
      to aggravate cord damage. Obtain senior advice before requesting these
      views. CT is usually a more appropriate investigation.
      Thoracolumbar spine Standard views are AP and lateral. In the thoracic
      region overlapping structures may make interpretation difﬁcult and
      necessitate other imaging. If X-rays are of diagnostic quality, visualization
      of compression or burst fractures, and displacement is not difﬁcult, but
      these have little relation to the degree of cord injury.
      CT and MRI CT delineates bony abnormalities and the extent of spinal
      canal encroachment. CT of the cervical spine (base of skull to T4 level) is
      indicated for patients requiring CT brain for signiﬁcant head injury or as
      part of a 'pan-scan' for multiple trauma (see SIGN and NICE guidelines).
      CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are useful for patients in whom
      there is clinical suspicion of injury (persistent pain, positive neurology)
      despite normal X-rays.
      Further treatment
      Immobilize cervical injuries using a ﬁrm, well-ﬁtting cervical collar (eg
      Philadelphia), pending a decision to undertake skeletal traction. Skeletal
      traction using Gardner–Wells calipers, or halo devices and pulley/weight
      systems may be undertaken by orthopaedic/neurosurgical staff to reduce
      fracture-dislocations, improve spinal alignment and decompress the cord.
      Thoracolumbar fracture-dislocations are normally treated by bed rest
      with lumbar support. In specialist units, unstable injuries may be surgically
      ﬁxed. High dose steroid therapy is no longer widely recommended as part
      of the treatment for blunt spinal cord injury—follow local protocols.
      With penetrating injuries, if the object is still in place, arrange removal in
      theatre where the spinal cord/canal injury can be directly seen.
                                                  SPINE AND SPINAL CORD INJURY: 3                                      385

Assessment of spinal X-rays
Interpreting spinal X-rays can be difﬁcult. If in any doubt, get senior expert
help. A systematic approach helps to prevent injuries from being missed:
• Check alignment of the vertebrae. The spine should be straight or
   follow gentle curves and should not exhibit any ‘steps’. On the lateral
   X-ray assess the alignment by checking in turn: anterior vertebral
   border, posterior vertebral border, posterior facets, anterior border
   of spinous processes, and posterior border of spinous processes. Look
   also at interspinal distances.
• Check alignment on the AP ﬁlm by following the spinous processes
   and the tips of the transverse processes (Fig. 8.13). Look for rotational
   deformity and asymmetry.
• Assess the integrity of each spinal vertebra, including the vertebral
   bodies, laminae, and pedicles.
• Be vigilant in assessing the odontoid peg view (Fig. 8.13), looking for
   asymmetry/displacement of the lateral masses of C1. Distinguish frac-
   tures (limited to bone area) from overlying soft tissue shadows (extend
   beyond area of bone). Note that the atlanto-odontoid distance should
   be ≤3mm in adults and ≤5mm in children.
• Look for indirect evidence of signiﬁcant spinal injury (i prevertebral
   space). The normal soft tissue prevertebral thickness at the antero-
   inferior border of C3 (ie distance between pharynx and vertebral body)
   is <0.5cm.

  Lateral cervical spine                                    AP cervical spine

                                                                                                    Mandible
                                                                                                          Axis
Atlas-dens gap
    Odontoid
                                   Atlas
                                                                                                          Pedicle
                                   Axis
                                                                                                          Transverse
Epiglottis                                                                                                process
                                   Facet joint

                                   Spinous
                                   processes
                                   Line of posterior
                                   spinous                                                                Spinous
                                   processes                                                              process
 Trachea                           Line of posterior
                                   wall of canal           Line of
Line of anterior                                           transverse    Line of        Line of spinous
                                   Line of posterior                     pedicles
edge of vertebral                                          process                      processes
                                   edge of vertebral
bodies                             bodies

  Odontoid peg view
                                           Base of skull
                                  Dens
                                                                         Lateral mass

                                                                  Axis

                           Articular surface

Fig. 8.13 Interpretation of spinal X-rays.
386    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Dermatomes
      Dermatomes front (Fig. 8.14)
                                      Ophthalmic division
                         Trigeminal       Maxillary division
                                       Mandibular division                    V
                                   Great auricular, C.2,C.3                   C.2
                                                                              C.3
                                            Cervical plexus,                  C.4
                                         superficial branches

           Intercostal  Lateral cutaneous br.
           nerves
                       Anterior cutaneous br.
           T.2-T.11
                                      Axillary
                            Intercostobrachial                  T.5                                C.5
                             Medial cutaneous                   T.6
                            Musculocutaneous                                                            T.3
                                     Posterior                  T.7
                           Radial   cutaneous                   T.8
                                    Superficial
            Brachial                   branch                   T.9                 T.2           C.6
            plexus                                              T.10
                                                                T.11                 T.1
                                                                T.12
                             Median
                                                                  L.1
                                                                                            C.8
                               Ulnar
                                                                                                              C.7
                                                                                      S.2,3
                                                                  L.2
                                         Ilioinguinal
                                     Genitofemoral                                    Obturator
                                 Lateral cutaneous
             Lumbar                         Anterior
             plexus                       cutaneous
                             Femoral             rami
                                                                 L.3
                                            Saphenous

                                                                       L.4

                                      Lateral cutaneous
                                                                                      L.5
                                           nerve of calf

             Sacral      Sciatic
             plexus                     Superficial and
                                        deep peroneal
                                                  Sural
                                                                                      S.1
                                        Medial plantar

                                                                             Sural
                                                                             Lateral plantar
                                                                             Tibial
                                                                             Lateral plantar
                                                                             Saphenous
                                                                             Medial cutaneous

                                                                             Lateral plantar

                                                                             Medial plantar

      Fig. 8.14
                                                                                               DERMATOMES                387

Dermatomes back (Fig. 8.15)
                                                                Ophthalmic division
                                                                Maxillary division       Trigeminal
                               C.2                              Mandibular division
                               C.2                                                                  Superfical
                                                                Mastoid branch, C.2, C.3
                               C.3                              Great auricular branch, C.2, C.3    cervical plexus
                               C.4                              Occipital, C.2
                                                                Occipital, C.3           Dorsal
                                                                Occipital, C.4           branches
                                                                Occipital, C.5–C.8

                                                                           Supraclavicular, C.3, C.4

                                           T.4                                Dorsal rami of thoracic nerves
                                           T.5
            C.5                            T.6
                                                                           Cutaneous branch of axillary
            T.3                            T.7
                                                                              Lateral cutaneous branches
                                           T.8
                                                                              of intercostal nerves
                                           T.9
                        T.2                T.10                            Medial and lateral cutaneous br. of radial
                                           T.11                            Medial cutaneous
                                           T.12                            Intercostobrachial
                  T.1                                                                     Musculocutaneous
                         L.1
    C.6                                                                                   Anterior branch of radial
                         L.2
                                                                                         Median
                  C.8

                         L.3                  S.3
                                                                                   Dorsal cutaneous branch of ulnar
    C.7                                                           Gluteal branch of 12th intercostal
                                     S.2                          Lateral cutaneous br. of iliohypogastric
                                                                     Lateral branches of dorsal
                                                                     rami of lumbar and sacral
                                                                  Medial branches of dorsal rami, L.1–S.6
                                                                  Perforating branch of
                         L.3                                                                 Pudendal plexus
                                                                  posterior cutaneous
                                                                  Lateral cutaneous
                                                                  Obturator
                                                                  Medial cutaneous                    Lumbar plexus
                                                                                         Femoral
                                                                  Saphenous

                                                                  Posterior cutaneous

                                     L.5                          Superficial peroneal      Common
                                                                                            peroneal
                                                                  Sural
                                                                                                         Sacral plexus
                                                                  Tibial
                         L.4
                                                                  Lateral plantar

                                       S.1

                                             L.5

                                                          L.4
                                       S.1

                                                         L.5

                                      Posterior aspect

Fig. 8.15
388    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Gunshot injuries
      In the UK, inform the police as soon as possible whenever a patient
      presents with a gunshot wound. Wounds produced by bullets/missiles are
      determined by kinetic energy (KE) transfer, missile ﬂight characteristics,
      and the tissue injured.
      Kinetic energy transfer
      The KE of a missile is directly proportional to its mass and to the square
      of its velocity (KE = ½mv2). Thus, tissue injury depends more upon the
      bullet’s velocity than its mass. At velocities > speed of sound, the rate of
      dissipation of KE becomes proportional to the velocity3 or even higher
      powers. Bullets travelling at >1,000ft/sec (300m/sec) are ‘high velocity’.
      The tissue itself
      Tissue density affects a missile, and the energy dissipation and tissue
      destruction. Bone involvement may cause additional retardation, while
      bony fragments cause secondary injuries.
      Cavitation
      High velocity bullets transmit energy to the tissues, compressing and
      accelerating them at right angles away from the track. This leads to cavity
      formation around the track. Over a few micro-seconds the cavity enlarges
      and then collapses. Tissue elasticity perpetuates a process of cavity refor-
      mation and collapse, with rapidly d amplitude of oscillations until all KE is
      expended. This causes highly destructive stretching, tearing and shearing
      of tissues, causing injury many times the size of the bullet. Since the pres-
      sure in the cavity is sub-atmospheric, debris and organisms are sucked in.
      Clinical aspects
      The principles of resuscitation of a patient with gunshot injury are identical
      to those for any major trauma case. Speciﬁc aspects are:
      • Consider staff safety: involve police and check the patient for weapons.
      • The magnitude of the external wounds may bear little relationship to
        the severity of internal injury. Remove the patient’s clothes (police
        evidence) and examine the entire body for entrance/exit wounds that
        are often missed in hairy areas (eg scalp, axillae, and perineum).
      • Patients are often young and ﬁt: signs of hypovolaemia may be delayed.
      • Chest injuries are commonly associated with pneumothorax (b
        p.334). PEA cardiac arrest should prompt rapid exclusion of tension
        pneumothorax then immediate thoracotomy to relieve cardiac
        tamponade (b p.343).
      • Abdominal wounds are associated with a high incidence of internal
        injury and require laparotomy and antibiotic cover.
      • Gunshot wounds are prone to anaerobic infection (especially tetanus
        and gas gangrene): clothing/fragments spread widely through tissues
        distant from the wound track. Extensive surgical debridement (wide
        excision/fasciotomy) is often required to remove devitalized tissue and
        foreign material. All high velocity injuries need delayed primary closure
        with grafting or suture at 3–5 days.
      • Ensure tetanus cover and give prophylactic antibiotics.
      • X-ray (AP + lateral) one body region above and one body region below
        any wound, as well as the region involved, to look for metallic FBs.
                                                            BLAST INJURIES        389

Blast injuries
Blast injuries may be due to explosions involving domestic gas, industrial
sites (eg mines/mills), or bombs. Often several mechanisms co-exist to
cause injury.
Blast wave (primary blast injury) This is an extremely short-lived
pressure wave (lasting a few milliseconds only) which expands outwards
from the explosive focus. It is produced by intense compression of air
at the interface of the rapidly expanding hot gases. The effects can be
dramatically aggravated and reinforced by reﬂection from solid surfaces,
such as buildings. Blast wave injuries are caused by 3 mechanisms:
• Disruption at air/tissue interfaces (especially lungs and ears, producing
   blast lung and tympanic membrane rupture, respectively).
• Shearing injuries at tissue/tissue interfaces causing subserous and
   submucosal haemorrhage.
• Implosion of gas-ﬁlled organs leading to perforation of the GI tract and
   cerebral or coronary air embolism.
Blast winds These are fast moving columns of air that follow the initial
blast wave. Their destructive force can be immense, leading to traumatic
amputation or even complete dismemberment. Blast winds also carry
debris (masonry, glass, etc.), which act as secondary missiles causing
fragmentation injuries.
Fragmentation injuries Objects from a bomb (eg nails, casing, nuts,
and bolts) or ﬂying debris (masonry, wood, glass) cause lacerations or
penetrating injuries. This is classiﬁed as secondary blast injury.
Flash burns These are usually superﬁcial, affecting exposed skin in those
close to the explosion. Smoke inhalation may also occur.
Tertiary blast injuries result from individuals being thrown by the blast
wind, often causing severe multiple injuries.
Quaternary blast injuries include all explosion related injuries or illnesses
not due to primary, secondary, or tertiary mechanisms listed above.
Psychological The psychological effects of blast injury are often severe,
comprising acute fear, anxiety, and the potential for chronic sequelae.
General aspects of treatment
The principles of blast injury treatment are identical to those for patients
with other causes of major trauma (b p.320).
Clinical features in blast injuries may be delayed, both in terms of onset
and development of clinical signs. This particularly relates to lung and intra-
abdominal complications; therefore, observe all patients for at least 48hr.
Search for pneumothorax (may be tension), respiratory failure/ARDS,
peritonitis, abnormal neurological signs (suggesting air embolism),
eardrum perforation, anosmia (direct olfactory nerve damage). Note that
ventilation of patients with blast injuries is a highly specialized area, with
potential risks of producing tension pneumothoraces and air embolism.
Other aspects For forensic reasons, ensure that all the patient’s clothes,
belongings, and any missile fragments are carefully retained, bagged,
labelled, and kept secure until given to police ofﬁcers.
390    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Burns: assessment
      Types of burns
      • Thermal.
      • Chemical.
      • Electrical (b p.266).
      • Radiation (b p.268).
      History
      Determination of the circumstances resulting in the patient being burned
      is essential to appreciate the nature of the insult and potential associated
      risks. Do not, however, delay resuscitation in an attempt to obtain a full
      history. Consider the following questions:
      • Was there an explosion? (risk of blast injuries).
      • Was the ﬁre in an enclosed space? (CO poisoning, smoke inhalation).
      • What was the burning material? (burning plastics release cyanide).
      • When was the patient removed from the ﬁre?
      • How long was the patient exposed to ﬁre and smoke?
      • Was there a history of loss of consciousness?
      • Did the patient fall or jump to escape the ﬁre? (look for other injuries).
      • What is the patient’s past medical history and tetanus status?
      Initial assessment
      This proceeds with resuscitation. Check: Airway, Breathing and Circulation.
      Particular problems associated with burns are:
      • Airway burns: suggested by hoarseness, stridor, dysphagia, facial and
        mouth burns, singeing of nasal hair, soot in nostrils, or on palate
      • Spinal injury: particularly seen with blast injuries and in those who have
        jumped from buildings to escape ﬁre
      • Breathing problems: contracting full thickness circumferential burns
        (‘eschar’) of the chest wall may restrict chest movement
      • Circulatory problems: hypovolaemic shock is a feature of severe burns
        and may also result from other associated injuries.
      Assessing extent
      Estimation of the percentage of body surface area burnt is difﬁcult for
      non-experts. Use Lund and Browder charts appropriate for the age of the
      patient (see Table 8.5, Fig. 8.16). The palmar surface of the patient’s palm
      (not including the ﬁngers) represents ≈0.75% body surface area.
      Assessing depth
      Burn depth varies with the temperature and duration of heat applied.
      Superﬁcial (ﬁrst and second degree) burns range from minor erythema
      (ﬁrst degree) through painful erythema with blistering, to deep partial
      thickness (second degree) burns, which do not blanch on pressure.
      Full thickness (third degree) burns may be white, brown, or black and
      look ‘leathery’. They do not blister and have no sensation.
      On the day of injury it may be difﬁcult to distinguish deep superﬁcial
      (second degree) burns from full thickness (third degree) burns, but
      correctly making this distinction does not alter the initial management.
                                                                           BURNS: ASSESSMENT                         391

                          A                                                         A

                          1                                                         1

                  2                  2                                 2                          2
                          13                                                      13

            1                            1                        1                                   1
           1 /2                      1 /2                        1 /2                              1 /2
                                                      1                     1                 1                1
11/2
                      B   1 B                        1 /2 11/2             2 /2          2 /2                 1 /2

                                                                            B                 B

                      C          C                                         C                  C

          13 /4                      13 /4
                                                                 13 /4                            13 /4

Fig. 8.16 Assessing extent of burns—Lund and Browder charts.

 Table 8.5 Relative percentage of area affected by growth (age in years)
                          0              1                5      10                 15                Adult
 A: half of head          91/2           81/2             61/2   51/2               41/2              31/2
                           3/            31/              4      41/                41/               43/4
 B: half of thigh         2 4                    4                     2                  2

                           1                 1             3                         1
 C: half of leg           2 /2           2 /2             2 /4   3                  3 /4              31/2

 Adults rule of 9’s:                         head                               =        9%
                                             each arm                           =        9%
                                             each leg                           = 18%
                                             front of trunk                     = 18%
                                             back of trunk                      = 18%
                                             perineum                           =        1%
 Infants rule of 5’s:                        head                               = 20%
                                             each arm                           = 10%
                                             each leg                           = 20%
                                             front of trunk                     = 10%
                                             back of trunk                      = 10%
392    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Major burns: resuscitation
      Prehospital ﬁrst aid measures
      • Ensure rescuer safety ﬁrst—be guided by the ﬁre crew.
      • Remove the patient from the burning environment. If clothes are smoul-
        dering, apply cold water and remove them, unless adherent.
      • Provide high ﬂow O2. Cover burns in clean sheets.
      Airway and cervical spine protection
      • Treat airway obstruction (b p.320).
      • Continue O2 and apply a hard cervical collar if there is any possibility of
        spinal injury—cervical spine imaging will be required subsequently.
      • If there is any evidence of impending airway obstruction (stridor,
        oropharyngeal swelling—see b p.394), call immediately for senior ED
        help and a senior anaesthetist. Urgent GA and tracheal intubation may
        be life-saving. Use uncut endotracheal (ET) tubes to allow for swelling
        of lips and face.
      Analgesia
      • Obtain IV access with two large peripheral cannulae.
      • Send blood: X-matching, FBC, COHb, U&E, glucose, and coagulation.
      • Provide analgesia (IV morphine titrated according to response).
      • Provide an antiemetic (eg IV cyclizine 50mg).
      Fluid resuscitation
      • Give IV ﬂuids. Start with isotonic crystalloid (eg 0.9% saline) at 2–4mL of
        crystalloid per kg body weight per % body surface area burned, over the
        ﬁrst 24hr following injury. Give half of this volume in the ﬁrst 8hr.
      • Check pulse, BP, and respiratory rate every 10–15min initially.
      • Insert a urinary catheter and test the urine. Patients with myoglobinuria
        are at particularly high risk of acute renal failure—reduce this risk by
        adequate ﬂuid resuscitation. Use urine output to guide ﬂuid therapy.
      • Review the rate of IV volume replacement frequently and adjust it
        according to haemodynamic parameters, in order to maintain a satisfac-
        tory urine output (>50mL/hr in adults; 1−2mL/kg/hr in children).
      • Some burns units prefer a colloid (eg Gelofusine® or albumin) to form a
        component of the initial volume replacement: follow local policy.
      • Patients with full thickness burns of body surface area >10% may require
        red cell transfusion in addition to the above measures.
      Breathing
      • Check COHb and ABG.
      • Circumferential full thickness chest burns restricting chest movement
        require escharotomy. Cut the burnt areas down to viable tissue to
        release the constriction. Cutting diathermy can be helpful to reduce the
        signiﬁcant blood loss involved in extensive escharotomy.
      • Obtain a CXR.
                                       MAJOR BURNS: RESUSCITATION             393

The burn
• Measure the area of the burn as a % of body surface area.
• Irrigate chemical burns with warmed water (see b p.396).
• Cover the burn with cling ﬁlm or dry sterile sheets. Do not apply
  extensive burns dressings before assessment by a burns specialist.
• Involve a burn specialist at an early stage—in the UK, the National Burn
  Bed Bureau will help to locate a suitable bed (tel. 01384 215576).
• Ensure tetanus prophylaxis, but avoid ‘routine’ prophylactic antibiotics.
The burnt patient in cardiac arrest
• Follow standard guidelines.
• Give a large bolus of IV ﬂuid.
• If there is a strong possibility of cyanide poisoning (eg burnt plastic
  furniture in a house ﬁre), give appropriate antidote, eg dicobalt edetate
  (see b p.207).
Vascular impairment to limbs and digits
Consider the need for longitudinal escharotomies. These are occasionally
needed if ischaemia causes severe pain: get advice from a burns specialist.
394    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Inhalation injury
      The commonest inhalation injury is smoke inhalation accompanying burns
      in house ﬁres. Inhalation injury alone may be fatal and it i mortality for a
      given body surface area of burn. Smoke is a complex and unpredictably
      variable mixture of solid, liquid and gas constituents.
      Common components of inhalation injury include:
      • Direct thermal injury.
      • Soot particles cause local injury to the cilia of the respiratory tract and
        obstruct small airways.
      • ≈85% of ﬁre deaths are caused by CO (b p.208).
      • Gas products of combustion: oxides of sulphur, nitrogen, ammonia,
        chlorine, hydrogen cyanide, phosgene, isocyanates, ketones, and
        aldehydes are highly irritative and cause laryngospasm. Some react
        with water in the respiratory tract producing strong acids which cause
        bronchospasm, mucosal injury and oedema.
      The nature of the inhaled insult determines the site, severity, and systemic
      features. The upper respiratory tract can dissipate heat efﬁciently, so that
      direct thermal injury to the lower respiratory tract is rare unless steam or
      other hot vapours are inhaled. In the lower airway, toxic components such
      as CO, oxides of sulphur, nitrogen, hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen chloride
      cause direct injury, and may act as systemic poisons.
      Clinical features
      Suspect smoke inhalation if any of the following features are present:
      exposure to smoke or ﬁre in an enclosed space, confusion or altered/loss
      of consciousness, oropharyngeal burns, hoarseness/loss of voice, singed
      nasal hairs, soot in nostrils or sputum, wheeze, dysphagia, drooling or
      dribbling, stridor.
      Investigations
      Peak ﬂow rate Determine this in all patients.
      ABG Detection of hypoxia, hypercapnia, and acidosis may be helpful, but
      does not correlate well with the severity of inhalation injury. Note that
      pulse oximetry has limited value because of the difﬁculty in distinguishing
      between oxyhaemoglobin and COHb.
      CXR Usually normal initially, later features of ARDS may develop.
      Carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb) CO poisoning cannot be detected by
      physical examination, SpO2, or pO2. Either arterial or venous COHB
      can be measured. Clinical features correlate poorly with COHb levels.
      Use the nomogram opposite to estimate COHb levels at the time of
      exposure. The management of CO poisoning is covered on b p.208.
      ECG CO binds to myoglobin 3× more avidly than to Hb and by affecting
      the myocardium may produce arrhythmias, ischaemia, or even MI.
      Fibre optic bronchoscopy, xenon lung scanning, ventilation-perfusion
      scans, or lung function testing may subsequently be required to assess
      lung problems due to inhalational injury.
                                                           INHALATION INJURY   395

Management
Signs of upper airway problems (facial burns, stridor, dysphagia, drooling,
d consciousness) indicate the need for early tracheal intubation by an
experienced doctor (ED/ICU/anaesthesia) with appropriate training.
Mucosal swelling in the oropharynx and epiglottis can progress rapidly and
necessitate a surgical airway (b p.326). A surgical airway in these circum-
stances can be difﬁcult due to burned skin and loss of landmarks. Meticulous
preparation and planning for the airway are essential. Flexible bronchoscopy
may help to assess thermal injury to the upper airway and help intubation.
Assisted ventilation with PEEP may be indicated.
Give the highest possible concentration of humidiﬁed O2. Hyperbaric O2
may be indicated for CO poisoning, but remains controversial (b p.208).
If bronchospasm occurs, give nebulized B 2 agonist (salbutamol 5mg) via an
O2 powered nebulizer. i in microvascular permeability leads to pulmonary
oedema 2–3 days after injury and pneumonia after 7–14 days. Pulmonary
ﬁbrosis is common among survivors.
Inadequate IV ﬂuid resuscitation is associated with greater pulmonary
oedema. Burned patients who have smoke inhalation need larger amounts
of IV ﬂuids to maintain cardiac and urine output.
Inhalation of HCN from smouldering plastics (eg polyurethane) results in
rapid systemic absorption. Measurement of blood CN concentration is
difﬁcult and takes several hours. Cyanide poisoning may be suggested by a
severe metabolic acidosis, a high lactate and i anion gap. Consider cyanide
antidotes (b p.207), but they are potentially toxic so do not use blindly.
There is no proven beneﬁt from steroid therapy.
Nomogram of decay of COHb with time
This nomogram (Fig. 8.17) allows back-calculation estimation of the likely
peak COHb level. It will considerably under-read for children and patients
who received a high prehospital FiO2.

                                                      100%
                                                      90
                                                      80
                                                      70
                                                      60
                                                      50
                                          100%
                                          80          40
                                          60
                                          50
                                          40          30
                        TIME SINCE        30
                        EXPOSURE
                                          20          20
                              1
                              2           10
                              3           8
                                          6
                              4                       10
                             5            4       Original
                          Hours     Measured      exposure
                                  concentration concentration

Fig. 8.17 Adapted from Clark et al. (1981).
396    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Management of smaller burns
      Assessment (b p.390)
      First aid measures
      Separate the patient and burning agent. Cool affected area with copious
      quantities of cold water, but beware of hypothermia in infants and young
      children.
      Need for admission
      Admit patients with large burns or signiﬁcant smoke inhalation for IV
      ﬂuids, resuscitation and analgesia. In the UK, the National Burn Bed Bureau
      will search for an appropriate bed (Tel: 01384 215576) after discussion
      with the local burns unit. Also refer for admission burns of suspected NAI
      origin and patients who would be unable to cope at home (eg an elderly
      person or if living in difﬁcult social circumstances).
      Referral to a burns specialist
      Refer patients with the following:
      • Airway burns.
      • Signiﬁcant full thickness burns, especially over joints.
      • Burns >10%.
      • Signiﬁcant burns of special areas (hands, face, perineum, feet).
      The burn wound
      • Leave full thickness burns uncovered and refer to a specialist.
      • Do not de-roof partial thickness burns with blistering—consider simple
        aspiration. Most can be cleaned and covered with an appropriate
        dressing (see below).
      Hand burns Consider covering with soft parafﬁn inside a polythene bag
      or glove sealed at the wrist, changed after 24hr. Simple parafﬁn/tulle
      dressings are an alternative—follow local policy. Elevate to minimize
      swelling. Avoid silver sulphadiazine cream except on specialist advice.
      Facial burns Leave uncovered, or consider application of soft parafﬁn.
      Eye burns Check VA and refer to a specialist with prior irrigation if
      chemical burns (b p.538).
      Perineal and foot burns Burns in these areas should be referred for burns
      unit admission as they require specialist nursing and wound care.
      Burns dressings
      The ideal burns dressing is sterile, non-adherent, and encourages wound
      healing in a moist environment. The diversity of dressings available reﬂects
      the fact that this ideal dressing remains elusive. Senior ED nursing staff will
      advise on local preference and policy. Accumulation of ﬂuid means that
      many dressings need to be changed at ≈48hr—often this is appropriately
      done at a GP surgery.
                                    MANAGEMENT OF SMALLER BURNS                 397

Analgesia and tetanus
Unless there is a contraindication and/or if the patient is elderly, NSAID is
appropriate and effective analgesia for many burns, which do not require
admission. Ensure prophylaxis against tetanus.
Burns in children and non-accidental injury
Unintentional burns are common in children—use the opportunity to
offer advice regarding injury prevention. A minority of burns may result
from NAI. Suspect NAI (b p.730) and seek senior help in the following
situations:
• When the explanation does not ﬁt the burn.
• Late presentation.
• Other suspicious injuries.
• Stocking and glove distribution scalds (± sparing of the buttocks)—this
   implies forced immersion in hot water.
• Circular full thickness burns ≈0.75cm diameter may represent cigarette
   burns.
Chemical burns
Initial assessment is notoriously difﬁcult. Alkalis tend to produce more
severe burns and can continue to penetrate even after initial irrigation.
Treat chemical burns with copious irrigation with water, continued for at
least 20min in alkali burns.
Hydroﬂuoric acid burns
Hydroﬂuoric acid is used industrially in a number of processes. Contact
with the skin causes particularly severe burns, often with signiﬁcant tissue
damage and severe pain. This is because hydroﬂuoric acid rapidly crosses
lipid membranes and penetrates the tissues deeply, where it releases the
highly toxic ﬂuoride ion. Fluoride ions may gain access to the circulation
and produce a variety of systemic problems by a variety of mechanisms,
including interfering with enzyme systems and producing hypocalcaemia
by binding to calcium.
Manage hydroﬂuoric acid burns as follows:
• Provide copious lavage to the affected skin then apply iced water (this
  provides better pain relief than calcium gluconate gel).
• Call a plastic surgeon at an early stage.
• Check serum Ca2+ and Mg2+, and U&E.
• Record an ECG and place on a cardiac monitor.
• Treat hypocalcaemia.
Cement burns
Wet cement or concrete can cause chemical burns due to the alkali
contact. These are usually partial thickness, but may be full thickness. They
often occur when wet cement falls into a work boot, but the burn is not
initially noticed. Involve a specialist at an early stage.
Phenol burns
Phenol may be absorbed through the skin, resulting in systemic toxicity
and renal failure. Get advice from Poisons Information Service (b p.181).
398    CHAPTER 8 Major trauma

      Crush syndrome
      A spectrum of conditions characterized by skeletal muscle injury
      (rhabdomyolysis). Causes include :
      • Direct injuries and severe burns causing muscle damage.
      • Compartment syndromes: ‘true’ crush injuries produced by entrapment,
        or ‘self-crushing’ (eg an unconscious individual from drug overdose or
        alcohol excess lying on a hard surface). A vicious cycle is established
        where i muscle compartment pressure obstructs blood ﬂow, the
        muscles become ischaemic and oedematous, further i compartment
        pressure and d blood ﬂow leading to more ischaemia and muscle cell
        death.
      • Non-traumatic causes: metabolic disorders (diabetic states, d K+,
        d PO43–), myxoedema, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, myositis due to
        infection, or immunological disease.
      • Exertional: from undue exertion, grand mal ﬁtting, rave dancing
        (particularly associated with ecstasy or cocaine use), often complicated
        by hyperthermia.
      Clinical features
      Adopt a high index of suspicion. Symptoms depend on the underlying
      cause, but muscle pain, tenderness and swelling may not be present at the
      time of admission. In the lower limbs, the condition is commonly confused
      with DVT. The classic compartment syndrome with pain on passive
      muscle stretching and sensory deﬁcits may take several days to develop
      and can pass unnoticed. The presence of distal pulses does not rule out a
      compartment syndrome.
      Investigations
      iCPK levels reﬂect muscle damage. Check U&E, PO43–, Ca2+ and urate.
      70% have myoglobinuria and pigmented granular casts (urinary stix tests
      do not differentiate between Hb and myoglobin). However, absence of
      myoglobinuria does not exclude rhabdomyolysis, as myoglobin clears
      rapidly from plasma and its presence in urine depends upon the release
      rate, the degree of protein binding, GFR, and urine ﬂow. If DIC is suspected,
      check a coagulation screen.
                                                     CRUSH SYNDROME            399

Treatment
Local problems Urgent orthopaedic referral is needed for compartment
syndromes. If the difference between intra-compartmental and diastolic
pressures is <30mmHg, fasciotomy, excision of dead muscle and even
distal amputation may be required. These procedures may induce
life-threatening electrolyte shifts, bleeding, local infection, and later
generalized sepsis.
Systemic complications Severe metabolic complications start after
revascularization. Hyperkalaemia may be life-threatening (b p.162).
Hypocalcaemia is common initially, but rarely symptomatic.
Acute renal failure can be produced by pre-renal, renal, and obstructive
elements. Following restoration of circulation or release from entrapment,
ﬂuid leaks into damaged areas d circulating plasma volume. Intracellular
muscle contents enter the circulation and myoglobin and urate crystals can
block the renal tubules. This process is aggravated by the d intravascular
volume and associated metabolic acidosis. DIC and drugs which inhibit
intra-renal homeostatic mechanisms (eg NSAIDs and B-blockers) may
also contribute.
Prompt correction of ﬂuid deﬁcits and acidosis (often with CVP
monitoring) and establishing a good urinary ﬂow is essential. Alkalinization
of the urine may be required: early use of mannitol has been advocated,
but can cause pulmonary oedema if renal impairment is already present.
If renal failure occurs, dialysis may be needed, but prospects for renal
recovery are good.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 9                                                        401

Wounds, fractures,
orthopaedics

The approach to wounds 402        Elbow injuries            450
Further assessment of skin        Soft tissue elbow
   wounds                   404      problems               452
Wound management            406   Anterior shoulder
Tetanus prophylaxis         410      dislocation            454
Antibiotic prophylaxis      411   Other types of shoulder
Wound aftercare             412      dislocation            456
Infected wounds and               Other shoulder injuries 458
   cellulitis               413   Soft tissue shoulder
Bite wounds                 414      problems               460
Speciﬁc bites and stings 416      Soft tissue neck injuries 462
Needlestick injury          418   Facial wounds             464
Puncture wounds             419   Pelvic fractures          466
How to describe a                 Hip dislocations and
   fracture                 420      acetabular fractures   468
Compound fractures          422   Sacral and coccygeal
Dislocations                423      fractures              469
Casts and their problems 424      Hip fractures             470
Soft tissue injuries        426   Shaft of femur fractures 472
Other soft tissue                 Approach to knee injuries 474
   problems                 427   Knee fractures and
Physiotherapy in the ED 428          dislocations           476
Approach to hand injuries 430     Soft tissue knee injuries 478
Clinical signs of hand            Other knee problems       479
   injury                   432   Tibial and ﬁbular shaft
Hand wounds and                      fractures              480
   associated injuries      434   Pretibial lacerations     481
Hand fractures and                Calf and Achilles tendon
   dislocations             436      injuries               482
Thumb fractures and               Approach to ankle
   dislocations             438      injuries               484
Soft tissue hand injuries 440     Ankle fractures and
Other soft tissue hand               dislocations           486
   problems                 441   Ankle sprains             487
Carpal bone fractures and         Foot fractures and
   dislocations             442      dislocations           488
Colles’ fracture            444   Toe injuries              490
Other wrist fractures       446   Soft tissue foot problems 491
Soft tissue wrist injuries/       Low back pain             492
   problems                 447   Acute arthritis           494
Forearm fractures and related     Eponymous fractures       498
   injury                   448
402    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      The approach to wounds
      Wounds often have medicolegal implications—therefore record notes
      thoroughly, legibly, and accurately (b Note keeping, p.4). Resuscitation
      is the initial priority for the seriously wounded patient. Stop bleeding by
      applying direct pressure.
      History
      Key questions are:
      • What caused the wound? (knives/glass may injure deep structures).
      • Was there a crush component? (considerable swelling may ensue).
      • Where did it occur? (contaminated or clean environment).
      • Was broken glass (or china) involved? (if so, obtain an X-ray).
      • When did it occur? (old wounds may need delayed closure + antibiotics).
      • Who caused it? (has the patient a safe home to go to?).
      • Is tetanus cover required? (see b p.410).
      Examination
      Consider and record the following:
      • Length: preferably measure. If not, use the term ‘approximately’ in the
        notes.
      • Site: use diagrams whenever possible (rubber stamps are recom-
        mended). Consider taking digital photographs, particularly for com-
        pound fractures, in order to minimize the risk of infection by disturbing
        the wound as little as possible prior to surgery.
      • Orientation: vertical, horizontal or oblique.
      • Contamination: by dirt or other FBs may be obvious.
      • Infection: either localized or spreading, is a feature of delayed presen-
        tations and is associated in particular with certain speciﬁc injuries (eg
        ‘reverse ﬁght bites’—see Bite wounds).
      • Neurological injury: test and record motor and sensory components of
        relevant nerves. Be aware that complete nerve transection does not
        automatically result in complete loss of sensation—some feeling is likely
        to be preserved (particularly in the hand). Assume that any altered sen-
        sation reﬂects nerve injury.
      • Tendons: complete division is usually apparent on testing. Partial tendon
        division is easily missed unless the wound is carefully examined—the
        tendon may still be capable of performing its usual function. Look in
        the wound whilst moving the relevant joint, and attempt to re-create the
        position of the injured part at the time of injury (eg clenched ﬁst) to
        bring the injured structures into view.
      • Vascular injury: check for distal pulses.
      • Depth: wounds not fully penetrating the skin are ‘superﬁcial’. Do not try to
        judge depth of other wounds before exploration. In some circumstances
        (eg neck wounds), exploration is not appropriate in the ED.
      • Type of wound: inspection often allows wounds to be described, helping
        to determine the mechanism of trauma (blunt or sharp injury) and
        hence the risk of associated injuries. The crucial distinction is whether a
        wound was caused by a sharp or blunt instrument. If in doubt, avoid any
        descriptive term and simply call it a ‘wound’. This avoids inaccuracy and
        courtroom embarrassment! Use the terms as described opposite.
                                          THE APPROACH TO WOUNDS                 403

Forensic classiﬁcation of wounds and injury
The expert forensic evaluation of injury is outside the remit of the ED
specialist, but a simple understanding helps to avoid incorrect use of
terminology with associated confusion (and sometimes embarrassment).
Incised wounds May also be referred to as ‘cuts’. Caused by sharp injury
(eg knives or broken glass) and characterized by clean-cut edges. These
typically include ‘stab’ wounds (which are deeper than they are wide) and
‘slash’ wounds (which are longer than they are deep).
Lacerations Caused by blunt injury (eg impact of scalp against pavement
or intact glass bottle), the skin is torn, resulting in irregular wound edges.
Unlike most incised wounds, tissues adjacent to laceration wound edges
are also injured by crushing and will exhibit evidence of bruising.
Puncture wounds Most result from injury with sharp objects, although a
blunt object with sufﬁcient force will also penetrate the skin.
Abrasions Commonly known as ‘grazes’, these result from blunt injury
applied tangentially. Abrasions are often ingrained with dirt, with the
risk of infection and in the longer term, unwanted, and unsightly skin
‘tattooing’. Skin tags visible at one end of the abrasion indicate the edge
of skin last in contact with the abrading surface and imply the direction in
which the skin was abraded.
Burns See b p.390.
Bruises Bruising reﬂects blunt force (crush) injury to the blood vessels
within the tissues, resulting in tender swelling with discoloration:
sometimes localized bleeding collects to form a haematoma. The term
‘contusion’ is sometimes used as an alternative for bruise—it has no
particular special meaning (or value). Record the site, size, colour, and
characteristic features of any bruising. It is impossible to determine the
exact age of a bruise from its colour. However, yellow colour within a
bruise implies (except in the neonate) that it is >18hr old.
Scratches These may comprise either a ‘very superﬁcial incision’ or a
‘long, thin abrasion’—leave the distinction to an expert.
Interpersonal violence—medicolegal implications
Victims of violence frequently attend ED for treatment of their injuries.
Some patients (particularly those who have suffered domestic violence)
may not provide an accurate account of how the injuries occurred and may
not seek involvement of the police. Classical defence wounds include:
• Isolated ulna shaft fracture as the arm is raised to protect against blunt
  injury.
• Incised wounds on the palmar aspects of the palms and ﬁngers sustained
  in attempts to protect against knife attack.
In cases where the police are involved and where injuries are serious or
extensive, the police may arrange to obtain photographs and a forensic
physician (police surgeon) may be involved in the role of documenting
injuries. Most ED patients who have suffered violence do not see a
forensic physician (police surgeon). Therefore, ED staff have a dual role of
treating injuries and recording them accurately for medicolegal purposes.
404    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Further assessment of skin wounds
      Investigation
      X-ray if there is suspicion of fracture, involvement of joint, penetration of
      body cavity or FB. Specify on request forms that a FB is being sought, to
      allow appropriate views and exposure. Most metal (except aluminium)
      and glass objects >1mm in diameter will show up on X-ray. Some objects
      (eg wood) may not: USS may demonstrate these. CT or MRI are also
      occasionally helpful.
      Note: X-ray all wounds from glass that fully penetrate the skin
      During X-ray, use radio-opaque markers (eg paper clip) taped to the skin
      to identify the area of concern.
      Wound swabs for bacteriology are unhelpful in fresh wounds, but obtain
      them from older wounds showing signs of infection.
      By far the most important investigation is:
      Wound exploration under appropriate anaesthesia
      Allows full assessment and thorough cleaning of wounds that extend fully
      through the skin. Do not explore the following wounds in the ED:
      • Stab wounds to the neck, chest, abdomen, or perineum.
      • Compound fracture wounds requiring surgery in theatre.
      • Wounds over suspected septic joints or infected tendon sheaths.
      • Most wounds with obvious neurovascular/tendon injury needing repair.
      • Other wounds requiring special expertise (eg eyelids).
      Obtain relevant X-rays beforehand. Adequate anaesthesia is essential—
      in adults LA (eg 1% plain lidocaine) is often suitable (b p.282), but
      document any sensory loss ﬁrst (if there is altered sensation, presume
      nerve injury and refer for formal exploration in theatre). Do not inject
      LA into the edges of an infected wound: it will not work in that acidic
      environment and it may spread the infection. GA may be the preferred
      option for treating some wounds in young children.
      Inspect wounds for FBs and damage to underlying structures. Most
      problems with wound exploration relate to bleeding. If it proves difﬁcult
      to obtain a good view:
      • Obtain a good light and an assistant. The assistant retracting on a stitch
         placed on either side of the middle of the wound allows full exposure.
      • Press on any bleeding point for ≥1min, then look again. Lidocaine with
         adrenaline (b p.283) is useful in scalp wounds which are bleeding
         profusely.
      • If bleeding continues, consider a tourniquet for up to 15min. Consider
         a sphygmomanometer BP cuff inﬂated above systolic pressure (after
         limb elevation for 1min) on the limbs, or a ‘ﬁnger’ of a sterile rubber
         glove may be used on ﬁngers or toes. Never leave a patient alone with
         a tourniquet on, lest it is forgotten. Ensure removal of the tourniquet
         afterwards. Record the time of application and removal.
      If these measures fail, refer for specialist exploration in theatre. Do
      not blindly ‘clip’ bleeding points with artery forceps, for fear of causing
      iatrogenic neurovascular injury. Sometimes, small blood vessels in the
      subcutaneous tissues can be safely ligated using an appropriate absorbable
      suture (eg 4/0 or 6/0 Vicryl (braided polyglactin) or Dexon).
                            FURTHER ASSESSMENT OF SKIN WOUNDS                  405

The approach to foreign bodies
FBs within soft tissues can cause pain, act as a focus for infection, or
migrate and cause problems elsewhere. Therefore, remove FBs from
recent wounds where possible, particularly if lying near a joint (but if FB
is within a joint, refer to the orthopaedic team for formal exploration and
removal). FBs which can be seen or felt or are causing infection are usually
best removed. Finding FBs is frequently difﬁcult without a bloodless ﬁeld
and good light. It may be appropriate to leave some FBs, such as gunshot
deeply embedded in buttock soft tissues (antibiotic cover advised).
However, most FBs of any size not removed in the ED warrant specialist
consideration.
Patients not infrequently present with symptoms relating to (suspected)
FBs under old healed wounds. In these circumstances, refer to an expert
for exploration under appropriate conditions.
Fishhooks
The barbs on some ﬁshhooks can make removal difﬁcult. In some cases,
it may be necessary to push a ﬁshhook onwards (under LA) and thus out
through the skin—wire cutters can then cut through the hook below the
barb and allow release. Wear eye protection when doing this.
There are alternative methods for removing ﬁshhooks. Smaller ﬁshhooks
that are relatively superﬁcially embedded can sometimes be pulled back
and removed through the entry wound once a hollow needle has been
advanced alongside the hook to cover the barb.
406    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Wound management
      Wound cleaning
      Thoroughly clean all wounds irrespective of whether closure is
      contemplated, to drisk of infection. The standard agent used for wound
      cleaning is 0.9% (normal) saline, possibly preceded by washing using tap
      water. Aqueous chlorhexidine or 1% cetrimide solutions are sometimes
      used. Do not use hydrogen peroxide or strong povidone iodine solutions.
      Wounds ingrained with dirt may respond to pressure saline irrigation
      (19G needle attached to 20mL syringe), or may require to be scrubbed
      with a toothbrush (use goggles to dchance of conjunctival ‘splashback’).
      Devitalized or grossly contaminated wound edges usually need to be
      trimmed back (debrided), except on the hand or face. If dirt or other
      foreign material is visible despite these measures, refer to a specialist, who
      may choose to leave the wound open.
      Wound closure
      There are three recognized types of wound closure:
      Primary closure Surgical closure (by whatever physical means) soon after
      injury.
      Secondary closure No intervention: heals by granulation (secondary
      intention).
      Delayed primary closure Surgical closure 3–5 days after injury.
      If there is no underlying injury or FB, treat fresh wounds by primary
      closure as soon as possible. Accurate opposition of wound edges and
      obliteration of dead space provides the best cosmetic outcome with least
      infection risk.
      Wounds not usually suitable for primary closure in the ED include:
      • Stab wounds to the trunk and neck.
      • Wounds with associated tendon, joint or neurovascular involvement.
      • Wounds with associated crush injury or signiﬁcant devitalized tissue/
        skin loss.
      • Other heavily contaminated or infected wounds.
      • Most wounds >12hr old (except clean facial wounds).
      Methods of closure
      If in doubt, sutures are usually the best option (see opposite).
      Steri-Strips™ Adhesive skin closure strips allow skin edges to be opposed
      with even distribution of forces. They are inappropriate over joints, but
      useful for pretibial lacerations, where skin is notoriously thin and sutures
      are likely to ‘cut out’. Before application, make Steri-Strips™ stickier by
      applying tincture of benzoin to dry skin around the wound. Leave 3–5mm
      gaps between Steri-Strips™. See also b Pretibial lacerations, p.481.
      Skin tissue glue Particularly useful in children with superﬁcial wounds and
      scalp wounds. After securing haemostasis, oppose the dried skin edges before
      applying glue to the wound. Hold the skin edges together for 30–60sec to
      allow the glue to set. Ensure that glue does not enter the wound. Do not
      use tissue glue near the eyes or to close wounds over joints.
                                                         WOUND MANAGEMENT     407

Staples Quick and easy to apply, particularly suited to scalp wounds.
Staple-removers are required for removal.
Sutures (‘stitches’ or ‘ties’) Traditional and most commonly used method
to achieve primary closure. Oppose the skin aiming for slight eversion
of wound edges, using strong non-absorbable inert monoﬁlament suture
material attached to curved cutting needles (eg prolene, polypropylene
or nylon) with knots tied on the outside. Interrupted simple surgical
knots tied using instruments are relatively easy, economical of thread
and have a low risk of needlestick injuries. Specialized continuous sutures
(eg subcuticular) are not appropriate for wounds in the ED. The size of
thread used and time to removal vary according to the site. Use absorbable
sutures (eg Vicryl) on the lips and inside the mouth. Absorbable sutures
may also be used to close subcutaneous tissues to dchance of haematoma
and infection. Suture choice and time to removal are given in Table 9.1.

Table 9.1 Suture choice and time to removal
Part of body                 Suture and size                     Time to
                                                                 removal
Scalp                        2/0 or 3/0 non-absorbable† glue     7 days
                             or staples
Trunk                        3/0 non-absorbable†                 10 days
Limbs                        4/0 non-absorbable†                 10 days
Hands                        5/0 non-absorbable                  10 days
Face                         5/0 or 6/0 non-absorbable           3–5 days*
Lips, tongue, mouth          Absorbable eg 6/0 Vicryl/Dexon      –
†
    One size smaller may be appropriate for children.
*
 Sutures may be replaced with Steristrips at 3 days.

Key points when suturing
The technique of a basic instrument tie is shown in Figs 9.1–9.6.
• Tie sutures just tight enough for the edges to meet.
• Do not close a wound under tension.
• Handle the skin edges with toothed forceps only.
• Avoid too many deep absorbable sutures.
• Mattress sutures are useful on some deep wounds, but avoid on hands
  and face.
• Dispose of sharps as you use them—do not make a collection.
• Use strategic initial sutures to match up obvious points in irregular
  wounds.
• If a suture does not look right—take it out and try again.
• If it still does not look right—get help!
408    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Fig. 9.1

      Fig. 9.2

      Fig. 9.3
           WOUND MANAGEMENT   409

Fig. 9.4

Fig. 9.5

Fig. 9.6
410    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Tetanus prophylaxis
      Tetanus causes many deaths in the developing world. Occasional cases
      still occur in the UK. Injecting drug users are at risk (particularly if using
      SC or IM routes). The exotoxin tetanospasmin produced by the anaerobic,
      spore-forming Gram +ve bacillus Clostridium tetani interferes with neuro-
      transmission (b p.236). Spore proliferation and toxin production is likely in
      heavily contaminated wounds with devitalized tissue. However, any wound
      (including a burn) is a potential risk: always ensure tetanus prevention.
      Tetanus immunization programme
      Standard active immunization involves an initial course of 3 IM or deep SC
      doses of 0.5mL tetanus toxoid (formalin inactivated toxin) given at monthly
      intervals starting at 2months of age, followed by booster doses at 4 and
      14years. A full course of 5 doses is considered to result in lifelong immu-
      nity. From 2006 in the UK, combined tetanus/diphtheria/inactivated polio
      vaccine replaced previous tetanus/diphtheria vaccine for adults and adoles-
      cents. Immunization required after injury depends upon immunization status
      of the patient and the injury. Inadequate immunity against tetanus is particu-
      larly likely in immigrants, the elderly, patients with dimmunity and those who
      have refused vaccination.
      Anti-tetanus prophylaxis
      The need for tetanus immunization after injury depends upon a patient’s
      tetanus immunity status and whether the wound is ‘clean’ or ‘tetanus prone.’
      The following are regarded as ‘tetanus prone’:
      • Heavy contamination (especially with soil or faeces).
      • Devitalized tissue.
      • Infection or wounds >6hr old.
      • Puncture wounds and animal bites.
      Follow Department of Health guidelines. See www.dh.gov.uk
      Do not give tetanus vaccine if there is a past history of a severe reaction:
      give HATI. Pregnancy is not a contraindication to giving tetanus prophylaxis.
      Patient is already fully immunized
      If the patient has received a full 5-dose course of tetanus vaccines,
      do not give further vaccines. Consider human anti-tetanus immunoglob-
      ulin (‘HATI’ 250–500units IM) only if the risk is especially high (eg wound
      contaminated with stable manure).
      Initial course complete, boosters up-to-date, but not yet complete
      Vaccine is not required, but do give it if the next dose is due soon and it
      is convenient to give it now. Consider human anti-tetanus immunoglob-
      ulin (‘HATI’ 250–500units IM) in tetanus prone wounds only if the risk is
      especially high (eg wound contaminated with stable manure).
      Initial course incomplete or boosters not up-to-date
      Give a reinforcing dose of combined tetanus/diphtheria/polio vaccine and refer
      to the GP for further doses as required to complete the schedule. For tetanus-
      prone wounds, also give one dose of HATI at a different site. The dose of
      HATI is 250units IM for most tetanus prone wounds, but give 500units if >24hr
      have elapsed since injury or if there is heavy contamination or following burns.
      Not immunized or immunization status unknown or uncertain
      Give a dose of combined tetanus/diphtheria/polio vaccine and refer to
      the GP for further doses as required. For tetanus-prone wounds, also give
      one dose of HATI (250–500units IM) at a different site.
                                          ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS           411

Antibiotic prophylaxis
Antibiotics are not required for most wounds. Thorough cleaning is the
best way of preventing infection. After cleaning and closure, consider
oral antibiotic prophylaxis (eg penicillin + ﬂucloxacillin) for certain
wounds: compound ﬁngertip fractures and wounds in those at extra risk
(eg valvular heart disease, post-splenectomy). Co-amoxiclav has activity
against anaerobes, and is appropriate for bites and heavily contaminated
or infected wounds: leave these wounds open. Antibiotics are indicated
for penetrating injuries which cannot be properly cleaned (b Puncture
wounds, p.419). Although a scientiﬁc basis is lacking, antibiotics are
frequently used for wounds >6hr old, complex intra-oral wounds and in
workers at high risk (gardeners, farmers, ﬁshermen).
412    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Wound aftercare
      Dressings
      A large variety of dressings are available, with little scientiﬁc evidence to
      help choose between them: choice depends upon personal preference/
      prejudice and local departmental policy. A dry non-adherent dressing
      will protect most wounds from inadvertent contamination in the ﬁrst
      few days. Dressings are not usually necessary for facial and scalp wounds.
      Beware circulatory problems resulting from encircling dressings/bandages
      applied too tightly to digits or other parts of limbs. Burns dressings are
      considered in b p.396.
      General advice
      Advise to keep wounds clean and dry for the ﬁrst few days. Limb wounds
      require rest and elevation for the ﬁrst 24hr. After this, restrict movements
      to avoid undue stress causing the suture line to open up (especially where
      the wound is over a joint). Warn all patients to return if features of infec-
      tion develop (redness, ipain, swelling, fever, red streaks up the limb).
      Approximate times to suture removal are shown on Table 9.1—these need
      to be adjusted to meet the occasion. For example, sutures over joints are
      sensibly left 14 days to avoid dehiscence. Similarly, sutures may need to be
      left in for longer where wound healing may be delayed (eg DM, the elderly,
      malnourished, and those on steroids). Local policy will dictate where suture
      removal occurs (GP surgery or ED). If available, discharge with illustrated
      instructions about wound care and suture removal. This may particularly
      help patients with memory impairment or under the inﬂuence of alcohol.
      Speciﬁc advice
      Patients often ask when to return to work. If a question of personal safety
      or safety of the public or work colleagues is involved, advise to return to
      usual duties only once the wound has healed and sutures are out. This
      particularly applies to food handlers and some workers with machinery.
      Provide a sickness certiﬁcate for the patient’s employer as appropriate.
      Review and delayed primary closure
      Arrange review of heavily contaminated wounds, infected wounds not
      requiring admission, and other wounds at particular risk of infection at
      ≈36hr. Check T* and look for wound discharge and erythema, ascending
      lymphangitis, and regional lymphadenopathy. Systemic symptoms or evi-
      dence of spreading infection despite oral antibiotics are indications for
      admission for wound toilet, rest, elevation, and IV antibiotics.
      Treat other wounds deemed initially to be at less risk of infection, but
      not suitable for primary closure, with cleaning, light packing/dressing, and
      review at 3–5 days. Ideal dressings keep wounds moist, so consider the
      need for dressing changes prior to closure. If the wound is clean, employ
      delayed primary closure after wound cleaning and debridement under
      appropriate anaesthesia. If despite further cleaning and debridement,
      foreign material remains ingrained, consider if the patient requires admis-
      sion. If there is much exudate and evidence of local infection, take wound
      swabs for culture, consider removing the sutures, clean and redress the
      wound, give oral antibiotics, and arrange further review.
      Do not use ‘loose closure’ in contaminated wounds. The technique has all
      the risks of infection combined with a poor cosmetic result.
                                 INFECTED WOUNDS AND CELLULITIS                 413

Infected wounds and cellulitis
Wound infection after injury
Although prompt treatment with cleaning and primary closure will d risk,
any wound may become infected. The risk of infection is i by:
• Contamination (eg bites) and foreign material (including excess sutures).
• Haematoma.
• Devitalized tissue.
• Poor nutrition and dimmunity (eg steroid therapy).
Pain is usually the ﬁrst clue to wound infection. Note that many soft tissue
infections (cellulitis, erysipelas) occur in the absence of an obvious wound
(see b Cellulitis and erysipelas, p.528).
Examination Indicates the extent of the infection. Erythema and tenderness
limited to the area around the wound suggest localized infection. Swelling
and ﬂuctuation are evidence of a collection of pus. Remove all sutures,
together with pus and devitalized tissue, under appropriate anaesthetic.
Send wound swabs for culture. Consider the possibility of a retained FB—
X-ray/explore as appropriate. After thorough cleaning, leave the wound
open, cover with a dressing and arrange review with a dressing change in
36hr. Consider the need for antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav) particularly for
cellulitis, for the immunocompromised and for patients at particular risk
(eg those with prostheses and valvular heart disease).
Consider admission (for rest, elevation, analgesia, wound/blood cultures,
and IV antibiotics) in patients with one or more of the following:
• A red line spreading proximally (ascending lymphangitis).
• Regional (sometimes tender) lymphadenopathy.
• Pyrexia >38*C.
• Systemic upset.
Soft tissue crepitus is ominous, suggesting gas-forming organisms (b p.237).
Infected hand wounds
A particularly common problem is an infected wound on the dorsum of
the hand over a MCPJ after a punch injury. These are often bite wounds,
presenting late with infection in the region of the joint. Refer for explora-
tion/washout in theatre and antibiotics (b p.416).
Infected facial wounds
Take infected wounds of the cheek very seriously. They pose a signiﬁcant
threat of sepsis spreading intracranially, resulting in papilloedema and
ophthalmoplegia due to cavernous sinus thrombosis. Adopt a low
threshold for referring for admission and IV antibiotics.
Infected surgical wounds
Infection of a recent surgical wound after a planned procedure is a rel-
atively common complication. In addition to the possible threat to life,
wound infection can have disastrous implications as far as the success of
the preceding operation is concerned (eg hernias may recur). Contact
the team which performed the surgery as soon as possible, to allow the
surgeon to treat the complication.
414    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Bite wounds
      Bites and infection
      Bites cause contaminated puncture wounds, contaminated crush injuries,
      or both. All carry a high risk of bacterial infection, some also a risk of viral
      or other infections (eg rabies).
      Bacterial infection is particularly likely in:
      • Puncture wounds (cat/human bites).
      • Hand wounds, wounds >24hr old.
      • Wounds in alcoholics, diabetics, or the immunocompromised.
      Bacteria responsible include: streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, Clostridium
      tetani, Pasteurella multocida (cat bites/scratches), Bacteroides, Eikenella
      corrodens (human bites).
      Approach
      Establish what the biting animal was, how long ago and where the bite
      occurred. Obtain X-rays if fracture, joint involvement (look for air) or
      radio-opaque foreign body (FB) (tooth) is suspected.
      Management of bite wounds
      Cleaning
      Explore fresh bite wounds under appropriate anaesthetic, debride and clean
      thoroughly with ‘normal’ saline (or by washing using tap water). Refer sig-
      niﬁcant facial wounds and wounds involving tendons or joints to a specialist.
      Closure
      Cosmetic considerations usually outweigh risks of infection for most facial
      wounds, so aim for primary closure. Elsewhere, choose between primary
      or delayed primary closure—the latter is usually preferred in bite wounds
      affecting limbs, due to the increased risk of infection. Do not close
      puncture bite wounds that cannot be satisfactorily irrigated.
      Antibiotic prophylaxis
      Deciding whether or not to employ prophylactic antibiotics for bite
      wounds can be difﬁcult and is controversial. Many departments advocate
      prophylactic antibiotics for all bite wounds. One approach is to give
      antibiotics for patients with any of the following:
      • Puncture bites.
      • Crush injuries with devitalized tissues.
      • Bites to the hand, wrist, or genitals.
      • Bites that are primarily closed.
      • Bites from humans, cats, and rats.
      • Bitten individuals who are immunocompromised (eg immunosuppressed,
        diabetes, post-splenectomy, rheumatoid arthritis, those with prosthetic
        joints).
      Co-amoxiclav is an appropriate broad spectrum agent, effective against
      Strep, Staph, Pasteurella, and Eikenella. Alternatives for patients allergic to
      penicillin/amoxicillin include doxycycline + metronidazole or (especially if
      pregnant) ceftriaxone alone.
      Do not use erythromycin or ﬂucloxacillin alone as prophylaxis.
                                                            BITE WOUNDS           415

Tetanus
Bite wounds are tetanus-prone. Give prophylaxis accordingly (b p.410).
Rabies (covered fully in b p.249)
Rabies results after the ‘bullet-shaped’ RNA rhabdovirus present in saliva
of infected animals is transmitted to humans via a mucous membrane or
skin break. After thorough cleaning, refer all patients who might have
been in contact with a rabid animal to an Infectious Diseases specialist.
Obtain further help from the Virus Reference Laboratory, London (020
8200 4400). The long incubation period of the rabies virus (14–90 days)
allows successful post-exposure prophylaxis at even a relatively late stage,
according to agreed guidelines.
Hepatitis, HIV
Consider possible risks of hepatitis B, C, and HIV in anyone who presents
following a human bite and treat accordingly (see under b Needlestick
injury, p.418). Quantifying risks can be difﬁcult, particularly for example, in
‘reverse ﬁght bites’ (b p.416) where the other person involved may be
unknown. If in doubt, take a baseline blood sample for storage (to allow
later testing if necessary) and provide cover against hepatitis B.
Treatment of infected bites
Most bacterial infections occur >24hr after injury and are due to
staphylococci or anaerobes. Pain, inﬂammation, swelling ±regional
lymphadenopathy within 24hr suggests P. multocida infection. Take wound
swabs of all infected wounds, then treat with cleaning, elevation, analgesia,
and antibiotics. Oral co-amoxiclav and outpatient review at ≈36hr is
appropriate for localized wound infection with no systemic symptoms and
no suspected underlying joint involvement. Refer patients with spreading
infection for IV antibiotics and admission.
Septicaemia is uncommon after bite injury, but has been reported with
the Gram –ve bacillus Capnocytophaga canimorsus, previously known as
Dysgonic Fermenter 2 (DF-2). Infection produces a severe illness with
septicaemia and DIC, often in immunocompromised (splenectomized
individuals, diabetics, or alcoholics). Take wound swabs and blood
cultures, then give IV antibiotics and refer.
Prevention of dog bites
Injury prevention measures aimed at preventing children from being bitten
includes legislation relating to ‘dangerous dogs’ and education. Children
may be taught the following:
• To treat dogs with respect.
• To avoid disturbing a dog that is sleeping, eating, or feeding puppies.
• To avoid shouting or running in the presence of a dog.
• Not to approach or play with unfamiliar dogs.
416    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Speciﬁc bites and stings
      Human bites and ‘ﬁght bites’
      Many human bites occur ‘in reverse’, when an individual punches another
      in the mouth, causing wounds on the dorsum of the hand over the MCPJs.
      Underlying joint involvement is common and may progress to septic
      arthritis unless treated aggressively with exploration, irrigation and anti-
      biotics. Refer all patients for this. Consider hepatitis B, C, and HIV, give
      appropriate prophylaxis (b Needlestick injuries, p.418) and arrange
      counselling.
      Tick bites
      Ticks are recognized vectors of a number of exotic diseases worldwide.
      In the UK, patients often present with embedded sheep ticks. Remove
      ticks by gentle traction with blunt forceps applied as close to the skin as
      possible. Avoid traditional folklore methods of removal, which may cause
      the tick to regurgitate, promoting infection. In areas where Lyme disease
      is endemic (see b p.231), some physicians provide antibiotic prophylaxis
      with amoxicillin.
      Insect bites
      Minor local reactions are common. Treat with ice packs, rest, elevation,
      analgesia and antihistamines (eg chlorphenamine PO 4mg tds or a non-
      sedating alternative such as loratadine PO 10mg od). Occasionally, insect
      bites may be complicated by cellulitis and ascending lymphangitis requiring
      antibiotics (b Infected wounds and cellulitis, p.413).
      Wasps and honey bee stings
      May cause local reactions or anaphylaxis—treat promptly (b p.42). Flick
      out bee stings left in the skin. Treat local reactions as for insect bites.
      Jellyﬁsh stings and ﬁsh spines
      Most jellyﬁsh in UK coastal waters are harmless. Wash the bitten part in sea
      water then pour vinegar (5% acetic acid) over it to neutralize the toxin.
      Fish spines (typically Weever ﬁsh) produce a heat labile toxin, which
      may be neutralized by immersion in hot water for 30min. Occasionally,
      tiny parts of the ﬁsh spines become embedded and cause long-term
      irritation. Localizing and removing these tiny FBs is difﬁcult, so refer to an
      appropriate expert.
      Contact with other wild animals
      Contact with rats’ urine may cause leptospirosis (Weil’s disease)—see
      b p.239. Provide prophylactic doxycycline to anyone who presents
      following an episode of signiﬁcant exposure (eg immersion in river water
      or sewage). Unusual bites may pose speciﬁc threats, which infectious
      disease specialists will advise about (eg monkey bites may cause herpes
      simplex infection: give prophylactic oral aciclovir). Bats may carry rabies
      (b p.249).
                                          SPECIFIC BITES AND STINGS          417

Snake bites
The European adder is the only native venomous snake in the UK. It is
grey/brown, with a V-shaped marking behind the head and dark zig-zag
markings on the back. Most bites occur in summer. Venom is injected by
a pair of fangs. The venom contains enzymes, polypeptides, and other low
molecular weight substances. Only 50% of bites cause envenomation.
Features
Envenomation causes pain and swelling: look for 2 puncture marks 1cm
apart. Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and hypotension may follow.
Investigation
Check urine, perform an ECG, and take blood for: FBC, U&E, LFTs,
coagulation screen, and D-dimer.
Treatment
• Prehospital: rest (and avoid interference with) the bitten part.
• Clean and expose wound, give analgesia and IV ﬂuids for hypotension.
• Treat anaphylaxis urgently according to standard guidelines
  (b Anaphylaxis, p.42).
• Give prophylactic antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav) and ensure tetanus
  cover.
• Antivenom has its own risk of anaphylaxis, but may be given for signs of
  systemic envenoming, hypotension, WCC>20 × 109/L, ECG changes,
  elevated cardiac enzymes, metabolic acidosis or signiﬁcant limb swelling
  (eg past the wrist for bites on the hand, or past the ankle for bites on
  the foot, within 4 hr).
• Obtain speciﬁc advice from a Poisons Information Centre (b p.181).
• Observe for least 24hr, all patients who have any symptoms after snake
  bite.
418    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Needlestick injury
      A needlestick injury is a specialized puncture wound. In a clinical setting, it
      may represent failure to follow universal precautions (b p.32) and should
      provoke a review of policy and procedure.
      Many infective agents have been transferred by needlestick: Blastomycosis,
      Brucellosis, Cryptococcosis, Diphtheria, Ebola fever, Gonorrhoea, Hepatitis B,
      Hepatitis C, Herpes zoster, HIV, Leptospirosis, Malaria, Mycobacteriosis,
      Mycoplasmosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Scrub typhus, Sporotrichosis,
      Staph aureus, Strep pyogenes, Syphilis, Toxoplasmosis, TB.
      In practice, the principal risks are hepatitis B and C and HIV. The risk of
      acquiring hepatitis B following a needlestick from a carrier has been estimated
      at 2–40%. All hospital workers should be immunized against hepatitis B and
      have regular checks of their antibody status. The risk of hepatitis C is believed
      to be 3–10%. In contrast, the risk of acquiring HIV after needlestick with HIV
      +ve source is much less (estimated at 0.2–0.5%, but may be higher if signiﬁ-
      cant volumes are injected). There is a small (≈0.03%) risk of HIV transmis-
      sion after mucocutaneous exposure (ie exposure of cuts, abrasions, mucous
      membranes including the eye). The (small) risk of acquiring HIV following
      needlestick injury from a person with known HIV may be reduced further
      by post-exposure prophylaxis, but time is of the essence (see below). No
      proven post-exposure prophylaxis currently exists for hepatitis C. Preventing
      needlestick injuries and exposure to these viruses is therefore crucial.
      Management
      • Wash the wound with soap and water.
      • Ensure tetanus cover.
      • Ensure hepatitis B cover: if not previously immunized, give hepatitis B
        immunoglobulin and start an active immunization course (give ﬁrst vaccine
        in the ED and arrange subsequent doses). If previously immunized, check
        antibody titres. If satisfactory, take no further action. If low, give booster
        vaccine. If very low give both immunoglobulin and start vaccine course.
        Many local needlestick policies advise obtaining informed consent from
        the source patient, prior to taking blood to check hepatitis and HIV status.
        In practice, the identity of the source patient is not always clear: do not
        withhold hepatitis B prophylaxis if there is any doubt.
      • If the source patient is known to be (or suspected of being) HIV +ve,
        follow local guidelines and/or refer immediately to an infectious dis-
        eases specialist to discuss post-exposure prophylaxis and follow-up.
        Follow Department of Health guidance on www.dh.gov.uk Combined
        prophylaxis therapy (eg 1 Truvada® tablet od and 2 Kaletra® tablets bd –
        ie 245mg tenofovir od + 200mg emtricitabine od + 400mg lopinavir bd +
        100mg ritonavir bd) is most effective if started within an hour of exposure,
        but may be worth considering up to 72hr. However, prophylaxis has side
        effects, especially diarrhoea. Involve both healthcare worker and a local
        expert in deciding whether or not to start prophylaxis. Either way, advise
        the patient to use barrier contraception and not to give blood as a donor
        until subsequent HIV seroconversion has been ruled out.
      • Take baseline blood for storing (serology for possible future testing),
        and in the case of a possible HIV source patient, also take FBC, U&E,
        LFTs, and amylase).
      • If the incident occurred in hospital, report it to Occupational Health.
                                                    PUNCTURE WOUNDS               419

Puncture wounds
Puncture wounds are small skin wounds with possible deep penetration.
Stab wounds to the trunk and neck are considered elsewhere
(b Penetrating chest injury, p.340).
Puncture wounds often involve the sole of the foot, patients having
trodden on a nail. Examine to exclude neurovascular injury, then obtain an
X-ray looking for FB. If signiﬁcant foreign material is present radiologically,
or the patient has associated fracture, tendon injury, or neurovascular
deﬁcit, refer for formal exploration and cleaning in theatre under a
bloodless ﬁeld. Otherwise:
• Irrigate and clean other wounds under local anaesthetic (LA) where
  possible (consider nerve blocks). For wounds to the sole of the foot
  this may be impractical. As a compromise, immerse foot in warm anti-
  septic (eg povidone iodine solution) for 15min.
• Apply a dressing and advise review/follow-up with GP as appropriate.
• Ensure adequate tetanus cover (b Tetanus prophylaxis, p.410).
• Prescribe simple analgesia.
• Strongly consider prophylactic oral antibiotic cover (eg co-amoxiclav).
Some puncture wounds may become infected despite treatment. This may
be due to retained foreign material in the wound. Pseudomonas osteitis is
an uncommon, but recognized complication of puncture wounds to the
foot, particularly where a nail has gone through training shoes to cause
the wound. Refer infected wounds for formal exploration and irrigation.
420    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      How to describe a fracture
      Clear, precise, complete descriptions of fractures aid accuracy and save
      time when referring patients.
      System for describing fractures
      • State the age of the patient and how the injury occurred.
      • If the fracture is compound, state this ﬁrst (and Gustilo type—
        b p.422).
      • Name the bone (specify right or left, and for the hand, whether dominant).
      • Describe the position of the fracture (eg proximal, supracondylar).
      • Name the type of fracture (eg simple, spiral, comminuted, crush).
      • Mention any intra-articular involvement.
      • Describe deformity (eg displacement, angulation) from anatomical
        position.
      • State grade or classiﬁcation of fracture (eg Garden IV).
      • State presence of any complications (eg pulse absent, paraesthesia,
        tissue loss).
      • Other injuries and medical problems.
      Example using this system
      ‘29 year old male motorcyclist with a compound fracture of the left
      humerus. It is a transverse fracture of the humeral shaft and is Gustilo type I
      compound and minimally displaced with no neurovascular compromise …’
      Type of fracture
      Simple Single transverse fracture of bone with only 2 main fragments.
      Oblique Single oblique fracture with only 2 main fragments.
      Spiral Seen in long bones as a result of twisting injuries, only 2 main
      fragments.
      Comminuted Complex fracture resulting in >2 fragments.
      Crush Loss of bone volume due to compression.
      Wedge Compression to one area of bone resulting in wedge shape
      (eg vertebra).
      Burst Comminuted compression fracture with scattering of fragments.
      Impacted Bone ends driven into each other.
      Avulsion Bony attachment of ligament or muscle is pulled off.
      Hairline Barely visible lucency with no discernible displacement.
      Greenstick Incomplete fracture of immature bone follows angulatory force,
      with one side of the bone failing in compression, the other side in tension.
      Torus/buckle Kinking of the metaphyseal cortex follows axial
      compression.
      Plastic deformation Deformation beyond the elastic limit but below the
      fracture point results in bending of bone ±microfractures (not apparent
      on X-ray).
      Pathological Fracture due to underlying disease (eg osteoporosis,
      metastasis, Paget’s disease).
                                      HOW TO DESCRIBE A FRACTURE                421

Stress Certain bones are prone to fracture after repetitive minor injury.
Fracture-dislocation Fracture adjacent to or in combination with a
dislocated joint.
Deformity Describe deformity using the terms displacement, angulation
and rotation.
Displacement (‘translation’) Describe the relative position of two bone
ends to each other. Further describe the direction that the distal fragment
is displaced from the anatomical position (eg volar, lateral). Also estimate
the degree of apposition of the bone ends (eg 50%).
Angulation This is usually described in terms of the position of the point
of the angle (eg posterior angulation means that the distal fragment is
pointing anteriorly). This can sometimes be confusing. Although a little
long-winded, one way to avoid confusion is to describe the direction
in which the distal part points, relative to the anatomical position (eg a
Colles’ fracture may be described as a ‘fracture of the distal radius in
which the distal fragment points dorsally’). Try to measure the angle on
X-ray.
Rotation Describe the degree of rotation from the anatomical position, in
terms of the direction (eg external or internal rotation) in which the distal
part has moved.
Fractures—the role of osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is an important factor in a signiﬁcant proportion of fractures
seen in the ED. The following fractures are frequently (but by no means
exclusively) associated with osteoporosis:
• Colles’ fracture (b p.444).
• Fracture of surgical neck of humerus (b p.459).
• Lumbar spine vertebral fracture.
• Fracture of neck of femur (b p.470).
• Pubic rami fracture (b p.466).
Patients with post-menopausal osteoporosis may be treated with
a biphosphonate in an attempt to drisk of future fractures, but do not
commence this treatment in the ED.
Long bone anatomy
Each long bone has a shaft or diaphysis with an epiphysis at each end.
While the bone is growing these are separated by an epiphyseal growth
plate and this narrows down into the bone shaft. The transitional area
of bone is the metaphysis. In addition to these landmarks, the femur and
humerus have a ball-shaped head, a narrower neck, and at the lower ends
a widened area consisting of the medial and lateral condyles of the femur,
and the medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus. Fractures prox-
imal to these areas of the femur and humerus are termed supracondylar.
Intercondylar fractures involve the central, distal, and juxta-articular
portion. Fractures of the proximal femur between the greater and lesser
trochanters are termed intertrochanteric.
422    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Compound fractures
      Compound (or open) fractures occur when a fracture is open to the air
      through a skin wound. They incur a risk of infection and can be associated
      with gross soft tissue damage, severe haemorrhage, or vascular injury. Treat
      as orthopaedic emergencies requiring rapid assessment and treatment.
      Classiﬁcation of compound injuries
      Gustilo classiﬁcation of compound injuries:
      Type I Compound fracture where wound is <1cm long and appears clean.
      Type II Compound fracture where wound >1cm, but is not associated
      with extensive soft tissue damage, tissue loss, or ﬂap lacerations.
      Type IIIA Either: compound fracture with adequate soft tissue coverage of
      bone despite extensive soft tissue damage or ﬂap laceration or any fracture
      involving high energy trauma or bone shattering regardless of wound size.
      Type IIIB Compound fracture with extensive soft tissue loss, periosteal
      stripping, and exposure of bone.
      Type IIIC Compound fracture associated with vascular injury needing repair.
      Management
      Provide adequate ﬂuid replacement, analgesia, splintage, antibiotics, and
      tetanus prophylaxis prior to surgical treatment. Rapidly complete the
      following steps while contacting orthopaedic service:
      • Treat life-threatening injuries before limb threatening injuries. Do not
         be distracted from initial priorities by dramatic distal limb injuries.
      • Control obvious haemorrhage by direct manual pressure whilst
         commencing IV ﬂuids and/or blood replacement.
      • Give analgesia in the form of incremental IV opioids (b p.276).
      • Once analgesia is adequate, correct obvious severe deformities with
         gentle traction and splint. Certain dislocations may require immediate
         correction. Remove obvious contaminants if possible (eg large lumps of
         debris or plant matter).
      • ‘Routine’ wound swabs for bacteriological culture are no longer recom-
         mended. They do not alter management and are poor predictors of
         deep infection.
      • If available, take digital photographs of the wound (this helps to avoid
         the need for repeated inspection by different clinicians).
      • Irrigate with saline, then cover the wound with a sterile moist dressing
         (eg saline soaked pads). Immobilize the limb in a POP backslab. Do not
         repeatedly inspect the wound as this greatly i risk of infection. Once
         dressed and in POP, leave injuries covered until surgery.
      • Give IV antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav (1.2g) or cefuroxime (1.5g)
         according to local policy). Consider adding gentamicin or metronida-
         zole if the wound is grossly contaminated.
      • Give tetanus toxoid if indicated, and give HATI if gross wound
         contamination present (b p.410).
      Record presence/absence of distal pulses/sensation and recheck frequently.
      Limb salvage or amputation
      Orthopaedic surgeons often face a difﬁcult decision as to whether or not
      a limb can be salvaged. Gustilo type IIIC injuries are associated with a
      high rate of amputation. The Gustilo classiﬁcation alone is not always an
      accurate predictor of outcome: other tools have been developed to assist.
      For example, the Mangled Extremity Severity Score takes into account the
      extent of skeletal and soft tissue damage, the extent and severity of limb
      ischaemia, associated shock, and age.
                                                           DISLOCATIONS          423

Dislocations
A dislocation involves complete loss of congruity between articular
surfaces, whereas a subluxation implies movement of the bones of the
joint, but with some parts of the articular surface still in contact. Describe
dislocations in terms of the displacement of the distal bone. For example,
the most common shoulder dislocation is described as ‘anterior’, with the
humeral head lying in front of the glenoid. Aim to reduce dislocations as
soon as possible in order to prevent neurovascular complications, drisk
of recurrence and dpain. However, in general, aim to X-ray (to identify
the exact dislocation ±associated fracture) before attempting a reduction.
Exceptions to this principle are:
• Dislocations associated with considerable neurovascular compromise
   requiring urgent intervention (this includes some ankle fracture-
   dislocations).
• Uncomplicated patellar dislocations (see b Knee fractures and
   dislocations, p.476).
• Uncomplicated mandibular dislocations (see b Mandibular injuries,
   p.376).
• Some patients with (very) recurrent shoulder dislocations, where there
   may be longer-term concerns regarding radiation exposure.
• Some patients with collagen disorders resulting in hypermobility
   (eg Ehlers–Danlos syndrome) and unusual/recurrent dislocations
   without signiﬁcant trauma.
• ‘Pulled elbow’ in young children (see b Paediatric upper limb injuries,
   p.724).
Use analgesia/sedation/anaesthesia appropriate to the dislocation and
the individual circumstances. For example, patellar dislocations often
reduce under Entonox®, ﬁnger proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ)
dislocations with LA digital nerve blocks, shoulder dislocations with IV
analgesia ± sedation, whereas posterior hip dislocations typically require
manipulation under GA. Except in very exceptional circumstances, X-ray
after manipulation to conﬁrm adequate reduction and also to check for
fractures which may not have been apparent on initial X-rays.
424    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Casts and their problems
      Plaster of Paris (POP)
      POP is cheap, easy to use and can be moulded. Usually applied in the form
      of a bandage or multiply folded as a supporting slab (see Figs 9.7 and 9.8).
      Disadvantages are susceptibility to damage (POP rapidly disintegrates if wet)
      and that it takes up to 48hr for larger casts to dry fully after application. Cut
      slabs to shape prior to use and apply over wool roll and stockinette. Mould
      with palms (not ﬁngertips) to avoid point indentation of plaster.
      Resin casts
      More costly, but lighter and stronger than POP and more resistant to
      water or other damage. Made of cotton or ﬁbreglass impregnated with
      resin that hardens after contact with water. Sets in 5–10min, maximally
      strong after 30min. Resin casts are more difﬁcult to apply and remove.
      Being more rigid and harder to mould, there is irisk of problems from
      swelling or pressure necrosis. Remove/cover any sharp edges on the cast.
      Complications of casts
      Give all patients discharged with casts clear written instructions (including
      a contact phone number) to return if they develop pain or other symp-
      toms in the immobilized limb. Formal cast checks within 24hr are only
      required if there is particular concern about swelling. Simple swelling or
      discolouration of ﬁngers or toes usually responds to elevation and simple
      exercises.
      Is the cast too tight?
      Act immediately upon suspicion of circulatory compromise from a cast.
      Look for the ‘ﬁve p’s: pain, pallor, paraesthesia, paralysis, and ‘perishing
      cold’. If any of these are present:
      • Elevate limb.
      • Cut wool and bandages of backslab until skin is visible along the whole
         length of limb.
      • Split full casts and cut through all layers until skin is visible along the
         whole length of limb.
      Any undivided layers will continue to obstruct the circulation until
      released. If this action fails to completely relieve the symptoms, contact
      orthopaedic and vascular surgery staff immediately, as angiography and
      urgent surgical intervention may be required. Note that compartment
      syndrome may occur in the presence of normal pulses.
      Is the cast too loose?
      Test by trying to move the plaster longitudinally along the limb. Replace
      excessively loose or damaged casts, unless there is an outweighing risk of
      fracture slippage.
      Local discomfort
      If there is local pressure discomfort (eg over a malleolus), cut a window
      in the cast to allow direct inspection of the skin. Trim or replace plasters,
      which restrict movement unduly.
      Cast removal
      Standard POP and selected resin casts may be removed with plaster
      shears. Use a plaster saw only after instruction in its proper use. In both
      cases, be careful to avoid skin damage.
                                               CASTS AND THEIR PROBLEMS       425

  Application of              Application of
  stockinette                 wool roll

                                                        Limb positional POP
                                                        shape
Fig. 9.7 Application of a Colles’ backslab POP.

              Limb position
                                                  Scaphoid POP shape
Fig. 9.8 Application of a scaphoid POP.
426    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Soft tissue injuries
      Sprains
      These occur from overstretching and tearing of ligaments. Sprains vary
      from sparse ﬁbrous tears to complete disruption of a ligament complex.
      The results are pain, tenderness, and soft tissue swelling. Ligament sprains
      are traditionally graded into three types, although distinguishing clinically
      between them may be difﬁcult:
      • First degree sprains involve minor tearing of ligament ﬁbres and are
         entirely stable.
      • Second degree sprains are more severe partial sprains—there may be some
         resultant slight ligamentous laxity, but with a deﬁnite end-point on stressing.
      • Third degree sprains reﬂect completely torn ligaments causing signiﬁcant
         laxity: patients sometimes report hearing a ‘snap’ at the time of injury.
      Ligament sprains are very common, but there is a lack of reliable evidence
      about treatment. Prolonged immobilization seems to be detrimental
      to recovery, due to muscle wasting and loss of proprioception. Painful
      minor sprains respond well to traditional measures: ice, compression
      with elastic support/strapping, elevation and progressive mobilization as
      soon as symptoms allow. Simple analgesics such as paracetamol or NSAID
      (eg ibuprofen) may help. Complete ligament rupture can be relatively
      painless, but if associated with gross joint instability may require surgical
      repair. Associated haemarthroses require orthopaedic appraisal, aspiration,
      and often initially, protection and immobilization in POP.
      Strains
      Indirect injury involving muscle-tendon units may be classiﬁed in a similar
      fashion to ligament sprains. Pain on palpation over the site of injury is also
      reproduced by passive stress or active contraction of the affected muscle
      unit. Sometimes, a palpable defect may be apparent in complete ruptures
      (which typically occur at the musculotendinous junction). However, asso-
      ciated swelling may prevent any defect from being easily palpable. Treat
      minor strains similarly to sprains; consider specialist review for complete
      ruptures, some of which may require surgical repair.
      Direct muscle injuries
      These result from direct impact causing local pain, bruising, and soft
      tissue swelling. Note that associated bone contusions can occur, such as
      in the perimeniscal areas of the knee (these are visible on MRI). Treat
      minor injuries with ice, analgesia, and early mobilization within the limits
      of symptoms. For more signiﬁcant injuries, consider and treat according
      to possible risks of compartment and crush syndromes (with rhabdomy-
      olysis) and large haematomas (see next section).
      Haematomas
      Blood can accumulate as a result of traumatic disruption of the vascular struc-
      tures in bone, muscle, or soft tissues. Deceptively large volumes of blood can
      be accommodated within the soft tissue planes of the chest wall or thigh.
      In the presence of massive visible bruising of the torso or a limb, check for
      shock and measure Hb and Hct. Perform a coagulation screen. Blood trans-
      fusion may be necessary. Treat minor haematomas with compression dress-
      ings, ice and consider ultrasound therapy. Large haematomas or supervening
      infection requires selective surgical drainage, haemostasis and antibiotics.
                                         OTHER SOFT TISSUE PROBLEMS               427

Other soft tissue problems
Myositis ossiﬁcans
After some muscle or joint injuries, calciﬁcation can occur within a hae-
matoma leading to restriction of movement and loss of function. Frequent
sites include calciﬁcation within a quadriceps haematoma (eg following a
rugby injury) where inability to ﬂex the knee >90* at 48hr after injury
indicates an irisk of myositis ossiﬁcans. Other sites include the elbow
and femur. Passive stretching movements of joints may be implicated
in the development of myositis ossiﬁcans. This particularly applies at
the shoulder, hip, and knee, where passive exercises are performed for
spasticity following paraplegia or head injury.
Treatment involves immobilizing the limb or joint for a period of weeks,
under specialist supervision. Early excision is contraindicated, as it is
invariably followed by massive recurrence, but delayed excision (after
6–12 months) can improve function.
Tendonitis/tenosynovitis
This includes a wide range of conditions, some of which may have medico-
legal implications (‘overuse’ or ‘repetitive strain’ injury). Examples include:
• Classic tenosynovitis: swelling along a tendon sheath, with pain on passive
  stretching or upon attempted active movement against resistance.
• Chronic paratendonitis (eg affecting Achilles tendon): swelling around the
  tendon with localized pain and tenderness.
• Tendon insertion inﬂammation causes epicondylitis in adults (see b
  p.452) and traction apophysitis in children (b Osteochondritis, p.708).
Appropriate initial treatment usually includes rest, immobilization,
and NSAID. Later, consider involving an appropriate specialist (eg
physiotherapist or hand therapist).
Bursitis
Inﬂammation of bursae most frequently affects the subacromial,
olecranon, and prepatellar bursae. There is localized swelling and
tenderness: generalized joint effusion and/or tenderness along the whole
joint line suggests an alternative diagnosis. In many instances, bursitis is
non-infective, and responds to rest and NSAID. Signiﬁcant warmth
and erythema raise the possibility of an infective origin. In this case,
consider aspiration for bacteriological culture and provide antibiotics (eg
co-amoxiclav or penicillin + ﬂucloxacillin).
Other problems
Other causes of joint or limb pain with no speciﬁc history of trauma in
the adult patient include stress fractures, cellulitis, and other infections,
osteoarthritis and other forms of acute arthritis, and nerve compression
(eg carpal tunnel syndrome). Apparently atraumatic limb pain in children
may present with limping—likely underlying causes vary according to the
age (b The limping child, p.704).
428    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Physiotherapy in the ED
      At its simplest, the term ‘physiotherapy’ in the ED includes the advice
      given to each patient following minor injury. At the other extreme, it
      encompasses the assessment and treatment of selected patients by skilled,
      experienced physiotherapists. It is valuable for a department to have close
      links with a physiotherapy unit, preferably with designated physiotherapy
      staff responsible for ED referrals. Find out local arrangements for access
      to and use of physiotherapy services.
      ‘Everyday’ physiotherapy
      Minor soft tissue injuries are amongst the most commonly seen problems
      in EDs. Once bony injury has been excluded (clinically and/or radiologi-
      cally) ensure that patients are discharged with clear, consistent advice on
      how to manage their own injuries in every case:
      • Be clear and speciﬁc about what the patient is to do.
      • Set a realistic time limit after which the patient should seek further
         attention if their symptoms are not improving.
      • Give additional written instructions for reinforcement (eg ankle sprains,
         minor knee injuries) as patients forget much verbal advice.
      Protection/rest/ice/compression/elevation (PRICE)
      This forms the traditional basic framework for treatment of most acute
      soft tissue injuries.
      Protection
      Protect the injured part (eg using crutches or a walking stick).
      Rest
      With most acute injuries, advise a period of 24–48hr rest after an injury.
      Ice
      Ice is often advocated both in immediate ﬁrst aid of soft tissue injuries,
      and in subsequent treatment. Crushed ice cubes wrapped in a damp cloth
      (to avoid direct contact with the skin) placed against an injured joint may
      d swelling and pain. Do not apply for more than 10–15min at a time.
      Repeat every few hours initially. A cold pack or bag of frozen vegetables
      can be used (do not refreeze if for consumption!).
      Compression
      Despite a distinct lack of evidence, injured joints (particularly the ankle)
      are often treated in some support. The easiest to use is an elasticated
      tubular bandage (eg Tubigrip®), either single or doubled over. If provided,
      advise not to wear it in bed and to discard as soon as convenient. If not
      provided, explain why, or the patient may feel inadequately treated. Avoid
      providing support bandages to patients with elbow and knee injuries—the
      bandage tends to be uncomfortable and ‘dig in’ and in the case of the
      knee, may affect venous return and i chance of DVT.
      Elevation
      Initially, advise elevation of injured limbs above horizontal to d swelling
      and discomfort. This is particularly important in hand or foot injuries.
      Exercise
      Start gentle, controlled exercises for any injured joint as soon as symp-
      toms allow. Demonstrate what is expected and conﬁrm that the patient
      understands what to do.
                                            PHYSIOTHERAPY IN THE ED             429

Formal physiotherapy
Physiotherapists are trained in the rehabilitation and treatment of injury,
based on a detailed knowledge of relevant limb and joint anatomy, bio-
mechanics, and physiology. In the ED, physiotherapy staff are valuable in
assessment and treatment of acute soft tissue injuries, patient education
and advice, and in the provision of appropriate mobility aids after injury
(particularly in the elderly). In order to make the best use of physiotherapy
services, follow these guidelines:
• Refer early if required for acute injury. Aim for the patient to be seen
  for initial assessment the same day, so treatment needs can be properly
  assessed.
• Discuss the problem and treatment options with the physiotherapy staff
  prior to referral.
• Use the physiotherapy service for selected cases, not as a general rule.
• Never use the physiotherapy department to simply ofﬂoad difﬁcult or
  problematic patients.
Physiotherapists have a range of different treatments at their disposal,
which typically focus upon regaining range of movement and mobility,
improving strength and proprioception.
430    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Approach to hand injuries
      The history
      Determine and record whether the patient is right- or left-handed, their
      occupation, and social situation. These points may have treatment implica-
      tions, (eg an elderly person living alone with little social support may not
      cope at home after a dominant hand injury).
      Suspect patients presenting with wounds on the dorsum of the hand over
      the index, middle, ring, or little ﬁnger MC heads of having sustained a
      human bite (‘ﬁght bite’) whatever history is given (b p.416).
      Terminology
      To avoid confusion always refer to ﬁngers by name not number (index,
      middle, ring, little).
      Use: palmar (or volar), dorsal, radial, ulnar (not anterior, posterior, lateral,
      medial).
      Bones of the hand and wrist
      There are 14 phalanges and 5 metacarpals (MCs). Name the metacarpals
      according to the corresponding ﬁngers (ie thumb, index, middle, ring,
      and little)—this avoids confusion. There are 8 carpal bones arranged in
      2 rows. The proximal row (radial to ulnar) is comprised of scaphoid, lunate,
      triquetral, and pisiform (Fig. 9.9). The distal row (radial to ulnar) are trape-
      zium, trapezoid, capitate, and hamate.

         1st metacarpal
                                                                Hook of hamate
             Trapezium                                          Hamate
             Trapezoid                                          Capitate
              Scaphoid                                          Pisiform
           Radial styloid                                       Triquetral
                 Lunate                                         Ulnar styloid

                  Radius                                        Ulna

      Fig. 9.9 AP view of normal wrist.
                                           APPROACH TO HAND INJURIES           431

Anatomy of ﬁnger extensor tendon (Fig. 9.10)

   Distal phalanx
                                           Lateral bands insert
                                           into distal phalanx

   Middle phalanx
                                           Middle slip of extensor expansion
                                           inserts to middle phalanx

   Proximal phalanx

                                           Tendons of intrinsic hand muscles
                                           join extensor expansion
Fig. 9.10 Anatomy
of ﬁnger extensor
tendon.                                    Insertion of extensor
                                           tendon to proximal phalanx

Anatomy of ﬁnger ﬂexor tendon (Fig. 9.11)

                               Flexor digitorum profundus
                               insertion to distal phalanx

                               Flexor digitorum superficialis dividing

Fig. 9.11 Anatomy of ﬁnger ﬂexor tendon.
432    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Clinical signs of hand injury
      Examination of hand injuries
      Injury to the hand’s rich collection of nerves, blood vessels, and tendons
      results in considerable functional deﬁcit. Assess carefully, taking into
      account hand anatomy and clinical patterns of injury (Figs 9.12 and 9.13).
      Speciﬁc signs of injury
      Table 9.2 Speciﬁc signs of injury
      Median nerve             dsensation in the palm over radial 3½ digits
                               unable to abduct thumb against resistance
      Ulnar nerve              dsensation palmar and dorsal 1½ ﬁngers,
                               little ﬁnger ﬂexed (non-functioning lumbrical)
                               unable to cross index and middle ﬁngers
                               dabduction/adduction
      Radial nerve             dsensation dorsum ﬁrst web space
                               (no motor branches in hand, but proximal injury
                               results in inability to extend wrist)
      Digital nerve            dsensation along radial or ulnar half of digit distally:
                               note that some sensation is usually preserved,
                               even with signiﬁcant nerve injuries
      Superﬁcial ﬂexor         hold other ﬁngers straight (immobilizing all deep
                               ﬂexors), then unable to ﬂex PIPJ (unreliable for
                               index ﬁnger). Also, 810% of individuals do not
                               have a ﬂexor superﬁcialis tendon to the little ﬁnger
      Deep ﬂexor               unable to ﬂex DIPJ
      Extensors                complete division prevents extension (at DIPJ
                               causes mallet deformity)
                               central slip division causes Boutonnière deformity
                               in recent trauma, hold PIPJ at 90* over table
                               edge, and try to extend versus resistance—
                               DIPJ hyperextends in central slip division
                               (Elson’s test)
      Deformity                a small amount of rotational deformity of a digit
                               (typically associated with a spiral/oblique MC or
                               ﬁnger fracture) can have a dramatic effect upon
                               long-term hand function (see Fig. 9.14): check
                               carefully to ensure that there is no abnormal
                               overlapping of ﬁngertips in the palm on
                               making a ﬁst
                                        CLINICAL SIGNS OF HAND INJURY   433

Fig. 9.12 Testing superﬁcial ﬂexor ﬁnger tendon.

Fig. 9.13 Testing deep ﬂexor ﬁnger tendon.

                                                   PIPJ
                                 MCPJ
                                                          DIPJ

                Normal

             Swan neck

           Boutonnière

                 Mallet

Fig. 9.14 Finger deformities.
434    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Hand wounds and associated injuries
      General principles of treating hand wounds
      • Remove rings as soon as possible after any hand or arm injury as swelling
        can develop relatively rapidly. Try soap or water-based lubricant before
        using ring-cutters. Alternatively, pass string or 0/0 silk under the ring and
        wrap it ﬁrmly around the ﬁnger distally, allowing the ring to come off
        over the compressed tissues.
      • Elevate to diminish swelling and pain.
      • Avoid subcutaneous sutures.
      • For patients who are uncooperative due to excess alcohol consumption,
        consider admission for a few hours to allow suturing with better
        co-operation later.
      • X-ray any hand injury caused by glass.
      • Remember to consider tetanus cover.
      Exploration under anaesthesia
      If it is obvious that surgical intervention by a hand surgeon is required, do
      not explore the wound in the ED. This particularly applies to suspected
      nerve injuries, where the use of LA renders subsequent assessment difﬁ-
      cult. Conversely, clinical assessment of tendon injuries can be misleading if
      the patient is reluctant to move due to pain. Exploration under anaesthesia
      is necessary in this situation and to exclude division of >50% of a tendon
      (where clinical examination may be normal, but repair is required). Use an
      appropriate LA nerve block (as outlined on b Nerve blocks at the wrist,
      pp.296–299).
      During exploration, consider the position of the hand at the time of injury:
      reproducing this may reveal injuries otherwise hidden. Therefore, put all
      mobile structures through their full range of movement.
      Extensor tendon injuries
      >50% or complete division needs repair (eg 4/0 or 5/0 non-absorbable
      monoﬁlament using Bunnell or Kessler stitch) by an experienced surgeon.
      This may be achieved under LA in the ED, depending on facilities and
      expertise. Follow extensor tendon repair with appropriate immobi-
      lization (eg volar slab type POP with ﬁnger joints in full extension and
      slight ﬂexion at the MCPJs). Treat <50% division by splintage in extension
      (eg POP slab as above) under the care of the hand surgeon.
      Flexor tendon injuries
      Refer immediately for specialist repair.
      Nerve injuries
      Complete division of a nerve may cause surprisingly little sensory loss,
      so take complaints of any altered sensation very seriously. Refer patients
      with suspected nerve injuries. Digital nerves can be repaired up to the
      level of the distal phalangeal joint (DIPJ), although it may be decided not to
      attempt to repair injuries which are distal to the PIPJ. Remember that it is
      functionally important to have intact sensation over the ‘edges’ of the hand
      (the thumb, the radial aspect of the index ﬁnger or ulnar aspect of the little
      ﬁnger). Patients sometimes present late after digital nerve injuries—repair
      can still be quite successful up to 2 weeks after injury.
                          HAND WOUNDS AND ASSOCIATED INJURIES                      435

Reverse ﬁght bites
Treat and refer as outlined in b Speciﬁc bites and stings, p.416. Consider
transfer of blood-borne infection as discussed in b Needlestick injury,
p.418.
Amputations
Refer patients with partial or complete digital amputation with bony loss.
Recent proximal amputations without crush injury in ﬁt young patients
may be suitable for re-implantation: others may be treated with ‘termi-
nalization’ or advancement ﬂap. Let the hand surgeon decide. Meanwhile,
dress, bandage and elevate, give IV analgesia, tetanus cover, broad spec-
trum antibiotics (eg cephalosporin), and keep fasted. Wrap the amputated
part in moist saline swabs and place in a sealed plastic bag, surrounded by
ice/water mix at 4*C.
Note: Do not freeze or place the amputated part directly in solution.
Finger pad amputations
Skin loss less than 1cm2 without bony exposure may be allowed to heal
with non-adherent dressings. Larger areas of tissue loss (particularly in
adults) may require skin grafting or advancement ﬂap, but some do heal
satisfactorily with simple dressings.
Ring avulsions
Refer all circumferential and signiﬁcant degloving injuries.
Compound injuries
Wounds over dislocations or fractures usually require specialist atten-
tion. Distal compound phalangeal fractures may be treated in the ED with
wound cleaning, closure, review, and prophylactic antibiotics.
Crush injuries
Frequently cause ‘burst’ injury ﬁngertip wounds. Clean the wounds and
take into account the likely swelling when considering closure. Elevate,
dress, give analgesia, and arrange review.
Nail bed lacerations
Accurate repair (eg 6/0 Vicryl) may prevent nail deformity. Nailfold-lacerations
extending towards the nail bed require removal of the nail to allow suture.
Consider replacing the nail after to act as a temporary dressing.
Foreign bodies under nail
Splinters and other FBs under ﬁngernails are relatively common. Apply a
digital block and remove with ﬁne forceps. If the FB cannot be reached
easily, cut away an appropriate piece of nail.
Subungual haematomas
Blood frequently collects under the nail after a crush injury, causing pain
by pressure. If >50% of the nail is affected, trephine the nail distal to the
lunula, using a red hot paper clip or battery operated drill.
High pressure injection injuries
Industrial grease or paint guns may cause small skin wounds, which initially
appear trivial, disguising a devastating injury with risk of permanent stiff-
ness and signiﬁcant tissue loss. X-rays may help to identify the extent of
foreign material. Refer all such patients to a hand surgeon for immediate
exploration and debridement.
436    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Hand fractures and dislocations
      Distal phalangeal fractures
      Treat closed fractures of the distal portion (tuft) of the distal phalanx with
      analgesia and elevation. Treat compound burst injuries (from crushing
      injuries or hammer blows) with meticulous exploration, wound toilet/
      repair under LA and arrange follow-up. Give antibiotics (not a substitute
      for primary surgical treatment).
      Mallet ﬁnger with fracture
      ‘Mallet ﬁnger’ injury may be associated with a small fracture at the base
      of the distal phalanx at the point of attachment of the extensor tendon.
      Treat as for (the more usual) mallet ﬁnger injury without fracture by
      plastic mallet splint for ≈6weeks, advice and follow-up (see details on
      b Soft tissue hand injuries, p.440). Refer larger bony fragments (>1/3
      articular surface) with mallet deformity or those with subluxation for pos-
      sible K-wire internal ﬁxation.

      Fig. 9.15 Mallet ﬁnger deformity.

      Fig. 9.16 Mallet ﬁnger with avulsion fracture.

      Proximal and middle phalangeal fractures
      Treat undisplaced fractures with elevation, neighbour strapping (Fig. 9.17),
      and analgesia. Manipulate angulated proximal and middle phalangeal frac-
      tures under digital or wrist blocks. A useful tip for proximal phalangeal
      fractures is to use a needle-holder or pencil placed adjacent to the web
      space as a fulcrum. Maintain reduction using neighbour strapping and a
      volar slab POP or ﬂexible padded aluminium (Zimmer) splint, although
      the latter can be difﬁcult to secure. If reduction is unsatisfactory or cannot
      be maintained, refer for surgical ﬁxation.
      Index, middle, and ring metacarpal fractures
      Check for displacement or rotational deformity and refer if present. Treat
      with analgesia, elevation, and protect in a volar slab POP. Internal ﬁxation
      may be considered for midshaft MC fractures with marked angulation, but
      can be complicated by marked post-operative stiffness.
      Phalangeal dislocations
      X-ray all dislocations prior to reduction for presence of associated
      fractures. Reduce under digital or metacarpal nerve block (b p.294) or
      Entonox® by traction and gentle manipulation, then check integrity of
      the collateral ligaments. Conﬁrm reduction on X-ray and immobilize the
      ﬁnger by neighbour strapping. Elevate the hand, provide oral analgesia and
      arrange follow-up.
                               HAND FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS                437

Fig. 9.17 Neighbour (buddy) strapping.

Little (5th) metacarpal fractures
Common result of punching. Check for rotational deformity by gently
ﬂexing ﬁngers into the palm (they should point roughly to the thenar emi-
nence and touch, but not overlap adjacent ﬁngers on ﬂexion). Angulation
is common with neck fractures and rarely requires correction, with even
up to 40* being accepted. Apply neighbour strapping, elevate and give
analgesia. A volar slab POP for 2weeks is sometimes advocated—follow
local protocols. Warn the patient that the 5th knuckle will be shorter than
before. Arrange follow-up and advise hand exercises as soon as possible.
Refer to orthopaedic team if there is rotational deformity or signiﬁcant
angulation, particularly with base and shaft fractures, which may need
surgery. Also refer patients with associated wounds, remembering that
these may be compound human bites (‘reverse ﬁght-bites’—b Speciﬁc
bites and stings, p.416).
Little (5th) metacarpal dislocations
Dislocations at the base of the 5th MC may be associated with a fracture.
Refer for reduction and internal ﬁxation.
438    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Thumb fractures and dislocations
      Dislocation at metacarpophalangeal joint
      After X-rays and LA block, attempt reduction. If successful, assess and
      document the integrity of the collateral ligaments (see b Soft tissue
      hand injuries, p.440), then immobilize in slight (≈15*) ﬂexion in a POP and
      arrange follow-up in fracture clinic. Reduction may be unsuccessful due to
      ‘button-holing’—in this case, refer for open reduction.
      Gamekeeper’s thumb with associated avulsion fracture
      Most abduction injuries result in ulnar collateral ligament injury without
      fracture, but occasionally an avulsion fracture occurs at the point of
      ligament attachment instead. Treat this in a scaphoid POP and refer to
      fracture clinic, unless the bony fragment is displaced by more than 2mm,
      in which case internal ﬁxation will probably be required.

                                         MC

      Fig. 9.18
      If undisplaced, treat in scaphoid POP, and refer to fracture clinic, but if
      displaced, refer for internal ﬁxation.
      Thumb dislocations
      Dislocations usually follow falls onto the thumb or hyperextension
      injuries. They can occur at any level, including at the interpahalangeal
      joint (IPJ), MCPJ, and at the carpometacarpal joint. Reduce dislocations
      by traction and local pressure under combined median and radial nerve
      blocks (b Nerve blocks at the wrist, p.296). Conﬁrm reduction by X-ray,
      immobilize in a scaphoid POP, and arrange follow-up.
                                THUMB FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS                439

Bennett’s fracture-dislocation (b p.498)
This is a fracture through the base of the thumb (1st) MC with radial
subluxation of the MC, leaving a small proximal fragment still joined to
the trapezium (Fig. 9.19). The injury results from a fall onto the thumb
or from a fall/blow onto a ﬁst closed around the thumb. Deformity and
swelling occur over the base of the thumb and may be mistaken clinically
for a scaphoid injury. This is an unstable injury requiring expert attention.
If undisplaced, apply a Bennett’s type POP (similar to a scaphoid POP, but
with the thumb abducted). If there is any displacement, refer for manipu-
lation under anaesthetic (MUA)/ﬁxation. Maintaining reduction often
requires the use of screw or Kirschner wire ﬁxation.

Fig. 9.19 Bennett’s fracture-dislocation.
440    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Soft tissue hand injuries
      Gamekeeper’s thumb
      The thumb’s ulnar collateral ligament is crucial for stability and function.
      It is typically injured in hyperabduction injuries (eg falls while skiing).
      Complete rupture usually results in the two parts of the ligament being
      separated by the adductor aponeurosis (the ‘Stener lesion’), so satisfac-
      tory healing cannot occur. If tender over the ulnar collateral ligament of
      the thumb MCPJ, obtain X-rays: if these demonstrate a fracture, do not
      stress the joint, but treat appropriately instead (b Thumb fractures and
      dislocations, p.438). If no fracture, assess stability of the ulnar collateral
      ligament by gentle abduction of the MCPJ (compare with the other hand).
      Examine the ulnar collateral ligament with the thumb slightly (15*) ﬂexed.
      If pain precludes adequate examination, consider Entonox® (and/or LA
      injection) and repeat the examination. Signiﬁcant (>30*) laxity implies
      complete rupture and need for operative repair.
      Treat uncomplicated sprains with analgesia, elevation, and either criss-
      cross adhesive strapping (‘thumb spica’) or a scaphoid POP if symptoms
      are severe, and arrange follow-up. Refer suspected or demonstrable
      ulnar collateral ligament rupture to the orthopaedic surgeon, to consider
      primary surgical repair.
      Mallet ﬁnger
      Injury to the extensor mechanism at the DIPJ is relatively common and
      results from forced ﬂexion of the DIPJ or from a blow/fall directly onto
      the ﬁngertip. In the elderly it can follow minimal trauma. There is loss of
      full active extension at the DIP joint. Normal ﬂexion is preserved.
      X-ray to exclude associated fracture—treated as outlined on b p.436.
      In the absence of a large fragment, treat in a plastic (mallet) splint secured
      with tape for ≈6weeks (see b p.436). Ensure that the patient understands
      the importance of wearing the splint at all times and to keep the ﬁnger
      straight if the splint is removed for washing (eg hold ﬁnger against a ﬂat
      surface until splint replaced). Warn that there may be a small degree of
      permanent ﬂexion deformity. Arrange initial follow-up at ≈7–10 days, to
      ensure compliance with treatment and to reassess in case swelling has
      d and a smaller splint is required.
      Volar plate injury
      These are signiﬁcant injuries, often with prolonged morbidity. Hyperextension
      at the PIPJ injures the volar plate at the base of the middle phalanx with or
      without evidence of bony involvement. Examination shows fusiform swelling
      of the PIPJ with tenderness over the volar aspect. Treat with ‘buddy strapping’
      to adjacent ﬁngers (or ‘Bedford splint’), elevate, provide analgesia, and begin
      mobilization immediately. Arrange review to ensure full mobility is regained.
      A2 pulley injury
      The ﬁnger ﬂexor tendon sheath at the PIPJ is thickened and known as the A2
      pulley. Occasionally (especially in rock climbers), the tendon cuts through
      the A2 pulley, causing characteristic bowstringing on ﬂexion. There may
      be associated tendon injury. Treat conservatively with buddy strapping (or
      Bedford splint) and elevation. Arrange hand specialist follow-up.
      Boutonnière deformity (b Eponymous fractures, p.498)
      Characteristic deformity from untreated rupture/division of central slip
      ﬁnger extensor tendon may follow blunt or penetrating trauma.
                                 OTHER SOFT TISSUE HAND PROBLEMS                 441

Other soft tissue hand problems
Pulp infections
Infection of the pulp space at the ﬁngertip may reﬂect underlying FB or
osteomyelitis, so X-ray to search for these and treat accordingly. If X-rays
are normal, incise the pointing area under LA digital block. Send pus for
bacteriology, apply a dressing, commence oral antibiotics (eg ﬂucloxacillin
250–500mg PO qds), and arrange follow-up.
Paronychia
Infection of the nailfold adjacent to the nail is common. In the early stages,
oral antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav or ﬂucloxacillin) may cure.
Once pus has developed, drain this under LA digital block by an incision
over the ﬂuctuance (usually a small longitudinally-orientated incision
adjacent to the proximal nailfold sufﬁces, but pus under the nail may
require removal of a segment of nail). Antibiotics are then unnecessary,
unless there is spreading infection (in which case, consider co-amoxiclav).
Pyogenic ﬂexor tenosynovitis
Infection of a ﬁnger ﬂexor tendon sheath may follow penetrating injury.
Classical signs (Kanavel’s signs) are:
• Tenderness over the ﬂexor tendon.
• Symmetrical swelling of the ﬁnger.
• Finger held in ﬂexion.
• Extreme pain on passive extension.
Ensure tetanus prophylaxis, then refer urgently for exploration, irrigation,
and IV antibiotics.
Other infections
These include palmar space infections and septic arthritis—refer
immediately for specialist treatment.
Locked ﬁnger
Elderly patients with underlying osteoarthritis (OA) sometimes present
with locking at a ﬁnger MCPJ. A ﬁxed ﬂexion deformity is present, such
that the patient can ﬂex, but not fully extend at the MCPJ. There is usually
no particular history of trauma—the underlying cause is entrapment of the
palmar plate on an osteophyte. Refer for an early hand surgeon opinion:
surgery may be required.
Trigger ﬁnger/thumb
This is relatively common, but not particularly related to trauma. Most
cases are satisfactorily treated by steroid injection into the ﬂexor tendon
sheath, but leave this to a specialist.
442    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Carpal bone fractures and dislocations
      Scaphoid fractures
      Assess and document whether there is tenderness over the scaphoid in all
      wrist injuries. Scaphoid fractures occur from falling onto an outstretched
      hand or from ‘kick-back’ injuries (eg from a steering wheel in a car crash
      or football goalkeeper making a save). Pain and swelling over the wrist’s
      radial aspect may be accompanied by difﬁculty gripping.
      Look for
      • Tenderness in anatomical snuffbox: compare both sides.
      • Tenderness over palmar aspect of scaphoid (scaphoid tubercle).
      • Scaphoid pain on compressing the thumb longitudinally.
      • Scaphoid pain on gentle ﬂexion and ulnar deviation of the wrist.
      • Tenderness over dorsum of scaphoid.
      X-rays Request specialized scaphoid (not wrist) views. Four views
      are usually taken (AP, lateral, right, and left obliques). Remember that
      scaphoid fractures may not be visible on initial X-rays. The scaphoid
      mostly fractures through the waist, but sometimes through the tubercle
      (the latter does not give rise to signiﬁcant complications).
      Treatment If there is clinical or radiological evidence of fracture, apply a
      scaphoid POP or splint, and arrange review in 10–14 days. Treat minimal
      snuffbox tenderness without radiologically visible fracture with analgesia,
      and a wrist splint and arrange review as above.
      Complications Include non-union, avascular necrosis, and OA.
      Follow-up of clinically suspected scaphoid fractures (but normal X-rays)
      is often undertaken in ED clinic. Review at 10–14 days after injury, when
      if there is no clinical evidence of fracture, patients may be discharged. If,
      however, there is continuing pain and/or scaphoid tenderness, repeat
      the X-rays: treat visible fractures in POP; but if X-rays are still normal,
      treat in splint or POP, and arrange MRI (or bone scan for those with
      claustrophobia or other contraindication to MRI) to deﬁnitively answer
      whether there is a fracture or signiﬁcant carpal ligament injury.
      Lunate dislocations
      These injuries are rare, but often missed (Fig. 9.22). They follow falls onto
      the outstretched wrist, and result in pain and swelling anteriorly over the
      wrist. Median nerve paraesthesia may be a clue to the diagnosis. X-ray
      shows dislocation and rotation of the lunate so that it is shifted in front
      of the carpus and its concave surface faces towards the palm instead of
      distally. The AP view may look relatively normal, so carefully scrutinize
      lateral views. Refer for immediate MUA.
      Complications Median nerve injury, avascular necrosis, Sudeck’s atrophy.
      Other carpal dislocations
      Isolated dislocations of other carpal bones occur, but often injuries are more
      complicated and involve dislocations (and fractures) of one row of carpal
      bones (eg trans-scaphoid perilunate dislocation; Fig. 9.21). Surprisingly,
      perhaps, given almost inevitable signiﬁcant swelling, these injuries can be
      missed. Give analgesia and refer for reduction by the orthopaedic team.
                        CARPAL BONE FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS             443

Flake avulsion carpal fractures
Small avulsions from the dorsum of the carpus are often from the
triquetrum. Treat with immobilization in a POP backslab or wrist support
splint, analgesia, and refer to fracture clinic.
Fractured hook of hamate
Local palmar tenderness may give rise to suspicion of a fracture of the
hook of the hamate. Diagnosis can be difﬁcult: specialized X-rays or CT
may be required to demonstrate the fracture. Immobilize in POP and
refer to fracture clinic.

                                Radius   Lunate   Capitate

                     Ulna

                                           Scaphoid
Fig. 9.20 Wrist: normal lateral.

                                                      Capitate
                                             Lunate

Fig. 9.21 Perilunate dislocation.

Fig. 9.22 Lunate dislocation.
444    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Colles’ fracture
      Presentation
      This fracture affects the radius within 2.5cm of the wrist, such that the
      distal fragment is angulated to point dorsally. It usually results from a fall
      onto an outstretched hand. Osteoporosis contributes to ifrequency in
      post-menopausal women. Colles’ fractures produce characteristic clinical
      deformity (sometimes likened to a ‘dinnerfork’). Check for scaphoid
      tenderness, distal sensation, and pulses in all cases.
      Radiological features
      X-ray appearances include one or more of the following:
      • Posterior and radial displacement (translation) of the distal fragment.
      • Angulation of the distal fragment to point dorsally (the articular surface
        of the distal radius normally has a 5* forward tilt on the lateral wrist
        X-ray).
      • Angulation of the distal fragment to point more radially (the articular
        surface of the distal radius is normally tilted 22* towards the ulnar side
        on AP wrist X-ray).
      • Impaction, leading to shortening of the radius in relation to the ulna.

      Fig. 9.23 Colles' fracture

      Treatment
      Provide analgesia, immobilize in a backslab POP, and elevate with a sling.
      Discharge those with undisplaced fractures (if they will manage at home)
      and arrange fracture clinic follow-up. Advise the patient to keep moving
      ﬁngers, thumb, elbow, and shoulder.
      Deciding if MUA is indicated
      MUA is required for:
      • Grossly displaced fractures.
      • Loss of normal forward radial articular surface tilt on lateral wrist X-ray.
        Neutral or minimal tilt may be acceptable in the very young or very old
        (particularly in the non-dominant limb). Seek senior advice if unsure.
      Timing of MUA
      Patients with compound fractures and/or symptoms of nerve compression
      require urgent MUA. For many other patients, the timing of the procedure
      is less important. Many EDs undertake closed manipulation of Colles’
      fractures in adult patients at the time of initial presentation, whilst others
      arrange for the patient to return for the procedure within 1–2days to a
      speciﬁc theatre list as a day case.
                                                       COLLES’ FRACTURE           445

MUA procedure for Colles’ fractures
Consent
Discuss the risks and beneﬁts of the procedure. In particular, explain that, if
left untreated, an angulated Colles’ fracture may result in long-term stiffness
and a signiﬁcantly weaker grip. The principal risks of manipulation are:
• Tears to the skin on the dorsum of the wrist (especially in those with
   thin skin (eg on steroids) and/or signiﬁcant swelling (eg on warfarin).
• Late slippage of the bones requiring a further procedure.
• Risks of the anaesthetic employed.
Choice of anaesthetic
The anaesthetic options available include: haematoma block (b p.289),
intravenous regional anaesthesia (b Bier’s block, p.290), IV sedation (b
p.308), GA (b p.310). The choice of anaesthetic will depend upon local
protocols, as well as patient related factors, such as the type of fracture
and extent of fasting. For example, a minimally angulated fracture in an
elderly individual may be satisfactorily managed using a haematoma block,
whereas a more dramatically angulated and displaced fracture may not.
Evidence suggests that Bier’s block is superior to haematoma block (see
www.bestbets.org).
Technique
Different individuals may employ different techniques, but the aim is to
attempt to return the anatomy to its previous position. In particular, it is
important to correct the dorsal angulation (‘restore the volar cortex’).
Many descriptions of reduction techniques involve initial traction and ‘dis-
impaction’ of the fragments, followed by wrist ﬂexion and pronation with
pressure over the distal radial fragment(s). Some operators focus more
upon gentle direct manipulation of the distal fragment, rather than indirect
measures (traction, wrist ﬂexion, etc.).
Following manipulation, apply a backslab POP, whilst maintaining the
reduction, with the wrist slightly ﬂexed and pronated (avoid excessive
ﬂexion as this can cause additional long-term problems). Satisfactory
reduction can be conﬁrmed by image intensiﬁer/X-ray. If the reduction is
not satisfactory, repeat the manipulation procedure.
Medium and long-term complications of Colles’ fracture
Patients may present to the ED with later complications following Colles’
fracture (and the treatment provided for it), including the following:
• Stiffness of wrist and adjacent limb joints: refer for physiotherapy.
• Malununion and cosmetic problems: refer to GP/orthopaedic team.
• Reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy (Sudeck’s atrophy): refer for physiotherapy
   and GP/orthopaedic follow-up.
• Carpal tunnel syndrome may occur after Colles’ fracture, but also reﬂect
   other problems (eg lunate dislocation): check original X-rays.
• Extensor pollicis longus rupture may occur some weeks after fractures
   with minimal displacement: see b Soft tissue wrist injuries/problems,
   p.447.
446    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Other wrist fractures
      Smith’s fracture
      This is an unstable distal radius fracture (sometimes referred to as a
      ‘reverse Colles’ fracture’) where the distal fragment is impacted, tilted to
      point anteriorly and often displaced anteriorly (Fig. 9.24). It usually follows
      a fall onto a ﬂexed wrist. Give analgesia, immobilize in a backslab POP and
      refer for MUA (often difﬁcult to hold in position after reduction) or ORIF
      using a buttress plate (preferred in some orthopaedic centres).

      Fig. 9.24 Smith’s fracture (lateral view).

      Barton’s and reverse Barton’s fracture (b p.498)
      An intra-articular fracture involving only the dorsal or volar portion of
      the distal radius is called a Barton’s fracture and reverse Barton’s fracture
      (Fig. 9.25), respectively. The resultant fragment tends to slip, so the fracture
      is inherently unstable. Provide analgesia, immobilize in a POP backslab and
      refer. Most patients require ORIF and plating.
      Isolated radial styloid fracture

      Fig. 9.25 Lateral view of a reverse Barton’s fracture.
      Caused by similar mechanisms of injury as scaphoid fractures (ie falls onto
      an outstretched hand or kickback injuries). It is sometimes referred to as
      a Hutchinson fracture (b Eponymous fractures, p.500). Treat with anal-
      gesia, backslab POP, elevation sling and fracture clinic. Internal ﬁxation is
      occasionally required.
                                SOFT TISSUE WRIST INJURIES/PROBLEMS                447

Soft tissue wrist injuries/problems
Wrist sprain
Exclude scaphoid or other fracture (or dislocation) before considering the
diagnosis of a ‘simple wrist sprain’. Relatively minor damage to ligaments
around the wrist can occur following hyperextension or ﬂexion of the
wrist, causing swelling and tenderness around the joint. Treat with a wrist
splint or tubigrip support, analgesia, or NSAIDs, and progressive exercise.
Continuing pain and problems arouse suspicions of more signiﬁcant injury
(possibly involving other structures, such as the scapholunate ligament or
triangular ﬁbrocartilage complex). Refer for specialist investigation.
TFCC injury
The triangular ﬁbrocartilage complex at the distal end of the ulna may
be injured with associated structures. Often, these injuries only become
apparent later, when what was diagnosed as a ‘simple wrist sprain’ fails to
settle—pain and tenderness persists over the TFCC. Arrange specialist
follow-up for further investigation (eg MRI) and treatment.
Rupture of wrist/hand tendons
Rupture of tendons may occur without penetrating trauma. The most
common rupture involves extensor pollicis longus a few weeks after
(usually undisplaced) fracture of the distal radius. Rupture of other
extensor (and occasionally ﬂexor) tendons occurs in association with
OA, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), scaphoid non-union, chronic renal failure
(CRF), systemic lupus erythromatosus (SLE). Refer to a hand surgeon.
Radial tenosynovitis (‘intersection syndrome’)
Typically follows unaccustomed repetitive activity, such as gardening, DIY,
or decorating. Over hours to days, a painful fusiform swelling develops
over the radial aspect of the distal forearm. Movement of the wrist pro-
duces pain and palpable (occasionally audible) crepitus. Immobilize in a
simple adjustable wrist splint and unless contraindicated, prescribe NSAID
for 7–10days. After this, allow gradual mobilization of the wrist and
educate about eliminating the cause. Immobilize severe cases in a forearm
POP for 2 weeks before beginning mobilization.
De Quervain’s tenosynovitis
Affects the tendon sheaths of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pol-
licis brevis. Pain, swelling, and crepitus occur over the lateral (dorso-radial)
aspect of the radial styloid. Symptoms can be reproduced by thumb or
wrist movement. Finkelstein described grasping the patient’s thumb and
rapidly ‘abducting the hand ulnarward’, but probably more useful is pain
on ulnar movement of the wrist with the thumb clenched in a ﬁst. Treat
with NSAID and splintage for 7–10 days. A removable fabric wrist splint
(including the thumb) may sufﬁce, but consider a scaphoid type POP for
severe pain. Persistent symptoms may respond to steroid injection of the
tendon sheath using an aseptic technique.
448    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Forearm fractures and related injury
      If one forearm bone is fractured, look for a fracture or dislocation of the other.
      Obvious deformity in an adult forearm indicates fracture of the radial and
      ulna shafts. Initially treat with:
      • Analgesia (eg increments of IV morphine + anti-emetic until pain
        relieved).
      • Immobilization in backslab POP.
      • If one or both fractures are compound, give IV antibiotics (b p.422),
        tetanus cover, and dress the wound.
      Always check distal pulses and sensation, and examine for associated
      injuries at the wrist and elbow. Only once this has been done and the
      patient is comfortable, can he/she be sent for X-ray. Ensure X-rays
      demonstrate the whole lengths of the radius and ulna, including separate
      views of both the elbow and wrist joints.
      Fractures of both radius and ulna shafts
      Adult fractures, unlike those in children, may be markedly displaced with
      little or no bony contact between the fragments. Rotational deformity is
      common. Check carefully for clinical evidence of neurovascular injury.
      Closed reduction is difﬁcult, and often fails or is complicated by late
      slippage. Treat fractures with analgesia/immobilization as above and refer
      for ORIF.
      Isolated ulna shaft fracture
      These usually occur from a direct blow to the outer edge of the forearm
      (it is typically seen as a defence injury) or from a fall striking the ulna shaft.
      X-ray the whole ulna and radius to exclude associated fracture or disloca-
      tion of the radial head (see below). If undisplaced, treat in an above elbow
      POP with the elbow ﬂexed to 90* and the forearm in mid-supination.
      Refer all displaced or angulated fractures for ORIF.
      Galeazzi fracture-dislocation (see b p.499)
      Deﬁned as a fracture of the radius associated with dislocation of the distal
      radio-ulnar joint at the wrist (Fig. 9.26). Always look for subluxation of
      the ulna in radial fractures. Treat with analgesia and immobilization in a
      temporary POP backslab. Refer for ORIF.

                  Dislocation of radio-ulnar joint

                                                             Fracture of radius

      Fig. 9.26
                           FOREARM FRACTURES AND RELATED INJURY                449

Monteggia fracture-dislocation (see b p.501)
Deﬁned as a fracture of the ulna associated with dislocation of the radial
head. Occurs from forced pronation of the forearm (eg fall onto an out-
stretched, fully pronated forearm). Can also occur by a direct blow or
fall onto the proximal ulna, displacing the head of the radius. Treat with
analgesia and immobilization in a temporary above-elbow POP backslab.
Refer to the orthopaedic team for ORIF (or sometimes in children, for
treatment with MUA and POP).
A related injury is the Hume fracture (b Eponymous fractures, p.500)
in which anterior dislocation of the radial head is combined with an
olecranon fracture. Refer for ORIF.
Note: Monteggia fracture-dislocations are not infrequently missed at
initial presentation, due to attention being distracted by the ulna fracture
(Fig. 9.27). To avoid this:
• Request elbow and wrist X-rays in any patient with forearm shaft
   fracture.
• Check all elbow X-rays carefully to ensure that the radial shaft is
   normally aligned and that the radial head abuts the capitellum.
                                                   Dislocated radial head

                            Fracture of the ulna

Fig. 9.27 Monteggia fracture-dislocation.

Isolated radial shaft fracture
These are very uncommon. Always treat and assume that there is some
associated damage to the distal radio-ulnar joint at the wrist.
450    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Elbow injuries
      In any injured elbow look speciﬁcally for:
      • Elbow effusion (felt as a tense, bulging swelling halfway between the
         lateral epicondyle and the point of the olecranon).
      • The normal relationship between the olecranon and the lateral and
         medial epicondyles: all should form an equilateral triangle with the
         elbow ﬂexed.
      • Range of movement: X-ray patients who cannot fully extend the elbow
         and ﬂex to touch the shoulder tip.
      Olecranon fractures
      Follow falls onto the point of the elbow. The olecranon fragment may dis-
      place proximally due to pull of triceps. Swelling, tenderness, or crepitus are
      present on examination. In the young, the olecranon epiphysis may cause con-
      fusion on X-rays. Treat undisplaced or hairline fractures in an above elbow
      backslab POP at 90*, provide analgesia and arrange fracture clinic follow-up.
      Refer fractures that are displaced or involve the elbow joint for ORIF.
      Radial head/neck fractures
      Follow falls onto outstretched wrist (the radial head impacts against the
      capitellum) or direct trauma to the elbow. They sometimes occur in
      combination with a wrist fracture. Examine movements—extension and
      ﬂexion are usually limited, but supination and pronation may be relatively
      normal. Look for an elbow effusion and palpate for tenderness over the
      radial head while supinating/pronating the elbow. X-ray conﬁrms elbow
      effusion, but fractures may be difﬁcult to see. Treat undisplaced fractures
      with analgesia, and a collar and cuff sling. If very painful, immobilize in an
      above elbow POP backslab at 90*. Arrange fracture clinic review. Refer
      comminuted or displaced fractures as they may require MUA, internal
      ﬁxation or occasionally excision/replacement of the radial head.
      Elbow effusion, no visible fracture
      Always assume that a radial head/neck fracture is present: provide
      analgesia, a collar and cuff sling, and arrange review to ensure that full
      movement is regained. Extra symptomatic relief may be achieved by
      aspiration of the elbow joint (via a point midway between the olecranon
      and lateral epicondyle) under aseptic conditions.
      Elbow fat pad sign

                     Elevated anterior fat pad

                  Fractured radial head
                                                                Posterior
                                                                fat pad

      Fig. 9.28 Elbow fat pad sign.
                                                          ELBOW INJURIES          451

Dislocated elbow
Examination reveals loss of the normal triangular relationship between the
olecranon and epicondyles. Check distal pulses and sensation as brachial
artery, median and ulnar nerves may be damaged. Elbow dislocations may
be classiﬁed according to the direction of dislocation and the presence of
associated fractures (eg fractured coronoid). The most frequent injury is
postero-lateral dislocation (ie movement of the distal part in a postero-
lateral direction).
After analgesia and X-ray, most dislocations may be reduced in the ED
under IV sedation with full monitoring (b Sedation, p.308). However, GA
is sometimes required.
Reduction Choose between the following techniques for reduction of
postero-lateral dislocations:
• Flex the elbow to 60* with countertraction on the upper arm. Pull on
  the fully pronated forearm at this angle. Slight ﬂexion at the elbow may
  be necessary.
• Alternatively, lever the olecranon forward with both thumbs while
  holding the elbow ﬂexed and while an assistant provides traction on the
  forearm.
Reduction is conﬁrmed by a ‘clunk’ and restoration of the normal
triangular relationship of the elbow landmarks. Once reduced, recheck
pulses and sensation, immobilize in an above elbow POP backslab at 90*
and X-ray again (looking for associated fractures). Consider admission for
analgesia and observation for possible signiﬁcant limb swelling. If unable to
reduce, refer for reduction under GA.
Supracondylar fractures (see b p.722)
Fractures of the distal third of the humerus usually occur from falls onto
the outstretched hand. They are most common in children (b p.722),
but also occur in adults. The elbow may be grossly swollen and deformed,
but the normal triangular relationship of the olecranon and epicondyles is
characteristically preserved. Check distal pulses and sensation carefully as
the brachial artery, ulnar, median, and radial nerves can all be damaged.
Immobilize in an above elbow backslab POP and give analgesia. Refer to
the orthopaedic surgeon as MUA/ORIF are usually required.
Fractures of the capitellum occasionally occur in isolation. If undisplaced,
treat conservatively with analgesia and POP. Refer those with displaced
fractures for specialist treatment (possibly ORIF).
Medial collateral ligament injury
Instability on stress testing of the medial (ulnar collateral) ligament implies
a signiﬁcant injury. Treat in backslab POP with the elbow ﬂexed to 90*
and supported in a sling. Arrange fracture clinic follow-up.
Other elbow injuries
Elbow injuries are relatively common in children. Speciﬁc injuries in children
are considered as follows:
• Supracondylar fracture (b Paediatric upper limb injuries, p.722).
• Lateral and medial condylar injury—(b p.724).
• Pulled elbow—(b Paediatric upper limb injuries, p.724).
452    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Soft tissue elbow problems
      Injuries to biceps and brachialis
      Inﬂammation of biceps and/or brachialis at the site of attachment at the
      elbow can cause persistent symptoms: treat with rest and NSAID. Biceps
      brachii can rupture either at its long head in the bicipital groove or near
      the elbow insertion. Long head ruptures typically affect the elderly and
      result in a characteristic abnormal shape and low biceps position on
      attempted elbow ﬂexion against resistance: unless the patient is young,
      ﬁt, and active, surgical repair is rarely indicated. Distal ruptures are some-
      times treated conservatively, but some may beneﬁt from repair: arrange
      orthopaedic review to consider this.
      Lateral epicondylitis
      This is commonly called ‘tennis elbow’. It follows repetitive or exces-
      sive stress to the origin of the forearm and hand extensor muscles at
      the lateral epicondyle. It can occur spontaneously, but usually follows
      repetitive lifting, pulling, or sports (eg as a result of an incorrect backhand
      technique in tennis). Inﬂammation, oedema, and microtears occur within
      the extensor insertion.
      Look for localized swelling, warmth or tenderness over the lateral epicondyle
      and immediately distal to it.
      Examine movements: dorsiﬂexion of the pronated wrist against resistance
      will reproduce symptoms.
      X-ray if the problem follows acute injury. Refer to the orthopaedic
      surgeon if there is an avulsion fracture.
      Treat with analgesia (preferably NSAID) and ice application. Support the
      arm in a broad arm sling and advise rest, followed by progressive exercise
      and avoidance of aggravating movements. If symptoms are recurrent
      or prolonged, refer as steroid injection, forearm clasp, physiotherapy,
      and occasionally surgery may help. Current evidence suggests that
      corticosteroid injection may provide short-term relief, but long-term
      beneﬁt remains unproven.
      Medial epicondylitis
      Often called ‘golfer’s elbow’, this condition has a similar pathophysiology
      to lateral epicondylitis: it is frequently seen in racket sports and golf.
      Examine for localized tenderness and swelling over the forearm ﬂexor
      insertion at the medial epicondyle. Flexion of the supinated wrist against
      resistance will reproduce symptoms. There may be d grip strength and
      ≈60% of patients have some symptoms of associated ulnar neuritis.
      Treat as for lateral epicondylitis.
      Osteochondritis dissecans
      This can affect the elbow and cause locking of the elbow joint. X-rays may
      reveal a defect and/or loose body. Refer to the orthopaedic team.
                                       SOFT TISSUE ELBOW PROBLEMS              453

Olecranon bursitis
Inﬂammation, swelling and pain in the olecranon bursa may follow minor
trauma or occur spontaneously. Other causes include bacterial infection
(sometimes following penetrating injury) and gout. Elbow movements
are usually not limited. Look for overlying cellulitis, wounds, and systemic
symptoms and check for iT* (these suggest infection). Gout or bacterial
infection can be conﬁrmed by aspiration of the bursa under aseptic
conditions and immediate microscopy for crystals or bacteria. Aspirate
using a small needle at a shallow angle and try to aspirate the bursa
completely.
Non-infective bursitis Provide analgesia, NSAID, and rest the arm in
a broad arm sling. Symptoms should resolve with rest over a period
of weeks. Rarely, persistent symptoms require surgical excision of the
olecranon bursa.
Gout bursitis Treat as above. Arrange follow-up through the patient’s GP.
Infective bursitis If there is evidence of underlying infection, treat with
rest, NSAID and start antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav or ﬂucloxacillin +
penicillin). Occasionally, infection requires referral to the orthopaedic
surgeon for surgical drainage.
Olecranon bursa haematoma A history of blunt trauma to the olecranon
followed rapidly by ‘golf ball-sized’ swelling over the olecranon, but with
a full range of elbow movement (and no evidence of fracture), implies
a haematoma in the olecranon bursa. Treat conservatively: attempts at
drainage may result in secondary infection.
Nerve compression
Ulnar nerve entrapment at the elbow (‘cubital tunnel syndrome’) is the
second most common upper limb nerve entrapment (median nerve
compression in carpal tunnel syndrome is the commonest. Refer these
chronic conditions back to the GP.
Acute radial nerve palsy above the elbow presents with sudden wrist drop
following a history of compression (eg crutch use, falling asleep with arm
over the back of a chair). The underlying injury is usually a neurapraxia,
which has the potential to recover completely given time with conservative
measures. It is crucial to ensure that ﬂexion contractures do not develop
in the meantime: provide a removable wrist splint, advise regular passive
wrist exercises, and refer for physiotherapy and follow-up to ensure
recovery.
454    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Anterior shoulder dislocation
      This is a common injury, which typically results from forced external
      rotation/abduction of the shoulder. The humeral head usually dislocates
      to lie anterior and slightly inferior to the glenoid. Patients often present
      supporting the affected arm with the uninjured arm.
      The diagnosis is usually obvious on examination. Look for:
      • Step-off deformity at the acromion with palpable gap below the
        acromion.
      • Humeral head palpable antero-inferiorly to the glenoid.
      • Evidence of complications: check especially for distal pulses and
        dsensation over the lateral aspect of the shoulder (the ‘badge’ area)
        supplied by the axillary nerve.
      Give analgesia and support in a temporary sling. X-ray before reduction
      to exclude associated fractures. X-rays show loss of congruity between
      humeral head and the glenoid. The humeral head is displaced medially and
      inferiorly on an antero-posterior (AP) shoulder X-ray.
      Treatment
      Reduce under sedation/analgesia with full monitoring, using one of the
      methods described below/opposite. The choice of technique is personal
      and depends partly upon familiarity. Apply minimal force to prevent
      humeral fracture or further soft tissue damage. In patients with habitual
      recurrent dislocation (and in a signiﬁcant proportion of other patients
      as well), reduction may be easily achievable with minimal use of drugs
      (eg Entonox® alone). Take time and perform the manoeuvre slowly.
      Note that in situations where IV sedation cannot be used or needs to be
      avoided, intra-articular lidocaine is an option.
      External rotation method
      This simple technique has a good rate of success. With the patient reclining
      at 45*, slowly and gently (without force) externally rotate the shoulder
      to 90*. If the dislocation has not yet reduced, forward ﬂex (elevate) the
      shoulder slowly.
      Kocher’s method
      Lie the patient back almost ﬂat, and once sedation and analgesia are
      adequate:
      • With the elbow ﬂexed to 90*, slowly externally rotate the shoulder.
        Pause if there is any resistance and continue only when muscles relax.
      • Slowly adduct the upper arm across the chest with the shoulder still
        held in external rotation.
      • Once adducted as far as possible, internally rotate the shoulder by
        ﬂipping the forearm towards the opposite shoulder.
      Reduction may occur at any time during the manoeuvre: success is more
      likely if the patient is relaxed (avoid traction) and if initial external rotation
      reaches 90*. A ‘clunk’ or return of normal glenoid contour conﬁrms
      success.
                                     ANTERIOR SHOULDER DISLOCATION             455

Modiﬁed Milch method
Slowly abduct the straight arm to 110*. With the elbow extended, apply
gentle steady traction to the arm, while an assistant controls movement of
the humeral head back into the glenoid.
Other techniques
Scapular manipulation With the patient lying prone, ‘manipulate’ the
scapula onto the glenoid by pushing the inferior tip of the scapula medially
and the superior part laterally.
Stimson’s technique A more traditional method with the patient prone.
Apply a weight strapped to the forearm/wrist of the affected side as it
hangs down and await reduction.
Hippocratic methods Many techniques have been described over many
centuries, but are probably of historical interest only.
Post-reduction After reduction, recheck pulses and sensation (including
axillary and radial nerves), and obtain a check X-ray. Immobilize in a
collar and cuff, and body bandage. Local policy sometimes includes
shoulder immobilization webbing or braces as standard. Provide analgesia
(eg co-dydramol) and arrange follow-up. If unsuccessful, difﬁcult or if
shoulder has been dislocated >24hr, refer for reduction under GA.
Fracture-dislocation of the shoulder
Most involve fractures of the greater tuberosity associated with ante-
rior dislocation of the shoulder (Fig. 9.29). Reduce under sedation as
with uncomplicated dislocations—in most cases the fracture will reduce
satisfactorily along with the dislocation. However, refer large or complex
fracture-dislocations involving the humeral head, neck or shaft.

Fig. 9.29 Anterior dislocation of the right shoulder.
456    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Other types of shoulder dislocation
      Posterior dislocation
      This uncommon injury is easy to miss. It results from a blow onto the
      anterior shoulder or a fall onto the internally rotated arm. It may also
      occur during seizures or after an electric shock (when other injuries and
      medical problems may be partly responsible for it being initially over-
      looked). The patient presents with the shoulder internally rotated. AP
      shoulder X-ray may appear normal, but careful inspection reveals an
      abnormally symmetrical appearance of the humeral head (‘light bulb sign’)
      and loss of congruity between the humeral head and the glenoid (Figs 9.30
      and 9.31). A modiﬁed axial shoulder X-ray (from above) or a translateral
      view will conﬁrm posterior dislocation of the humeral head. Manipulate
      under sedation by applying traction and external rotation to the upper
      limb at 90* to the body. If difﬁcult, refer for reduction under GA. Treat
      and follow-up as for anterior dislocation.

      Fig. 9.30 AP view of posterior shoulder dislocation: light bulb sign.

      Fig. 9.31 Modiﬁed axial view of posterior shoulder dislocation.
                          OTHER TYPES OF SHOULDER DISLOCATION                   457

Luxatio erecta
This is a rare inferior dislocation of the humeral head. The patient presents
with arm held abducted above head. Check carefully for neurovascular
complications. Reduce under sedation by traction in line with the abducted
upper arm, followed by adduction of the shoulder. May require reduction
under GA. Treat and follow-up as for anterior dislocation.
458    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Other shoulder injuries
      Acromio-clavicular (AC) joint injury
      Common injuries which usually follow falls onto the shoulder or violent
      sudden movements of the upper limb. Look for local pain, swelling, or
      a palpable step over the AC joint. X-rays show fractures or AC joint
      disruption (vertical subluxation of the AC joint >1–2mm) (Fig. 9.32). The
      diagnosis may be made more obvious by asking the patient to hold a heavy
      object while the X-ray is taken. AC joint injuries are classiﬁed:
      • Grade I : minimal separation. Only acromio-clavicular ligaments involved.
      • Grade II : obvious subluxation, but still some apposition of bony ends.
      • Grade III : complete dislocation of AC joint, indicating rupture of the
         conoid and trapezoid ligaments, in addition to the acromio-clavicular
         ligaments.
      Treat with analgesia, support in a broad arm sling, and arrange follow-up
      for grades II and III injuries. These measures allow complete recovery in
      most cases. Occasionally, selected patients beneﬁt from internal ﬁxation.
        Acromio-clavicular
            ligament                                     Grade III

                      Conoid and
                  trapezoid ligaments

      Fig. 9.32

      Clavicle fracture
      This common injury results from direct trauma or from falls onto the out-
      stretched hand or point of the shoulder. Check carefully for neurovascular
      complications (these are rare, but potentially life-threatening).
      Treat with analgesia, a broad arm sling and arrange fracture clinic follow-
      up. The vast majority of fractures unite satisfactorily with conservative
      treatment. Rarely, grossly displaced fractures are internally ﬁxed.
      Scapular fracture
      Usually results from direct trauma and implies a forceful mechanism of
      injury. Check carefully for associated injuries to the thorax, such as rib
      fractures or haemo-pneumothorax.
      Treat isolated fractures with a broad arm sling, analgesia, and arrange
      follow-up.
                                            OTHER SHOULDER INJURIES              459

Humeral neck/head fracture
These result from direct trauma to the upper arm or from falls onto an
outstretched hand. Examine for tenderness or swelling over the proximal
humerus. Shoulder movements are usually limited by pain. X-rays typically
reveal impacted or oblique fractures, with or without associated fractures
of the greater and lesser tuberosities. Fractures may be classiﬁed as 2, 3,
or 4-part fractures according to the number of fragments resulting (eg a
fractured humeral neck combined with a fractured greater tuberosity will
be a ‘3 part fracture’).
Treat with a collar and cuff support, analgesia, and follow-up. Warn the
patient to expect signiﬁcant visible bruising to appear, extending down
the arm towards the elbow (for this reason, it is helpful to document the
lack of any clinical evidence of elbow injury at ﬁrst presentation). Refer all
comminuted, displaced, or markedly angulated humeral neck fractures as
MUA and, occasionally, internal ﬁxation/hemi-arthroplasty are indicated.
Shaft of humerus fracture
Results from a fall onto an outstretched hand or onto the elbow. The
fracture may be obvious and palpable. Check distal pulses, radial nerve
and elbow joint. X-ray reveals a transverse, comminuted, or spiral humeral
shaft fracture.
Provide analgesia and support the fracture in a POP U-slab (slab of plaster
from the axilla down to and around the olecranon and up the outside of
the upper arm). Apply with the elbow ﬂexed to 90° and hold in place
with a bandage. Alternative treatment includes a ‘hanging cast’ POP
(above elbow POP at 90°—the weight of POP and arm hold the fracture
in a satisfactory position). Refer if displaced, comminuted, or angulated, or
if neurovascular complications are suspected. MUA and internal ﬁxation
are required in these cases.
Rotator cuff tears
Tears (supraspinatus rupture most commonly) usually follow chronic
rotator cuff disease in patients >40years. May follow trauma (eg falls with
hyperabduction or hyperextension of the shoulder). Examine for drange
of movement, weakness, crepitus, and tenderness over the cuff insertions
and subacromial area. Examine supraspinatus strength by testing resistance
to abduction. Look for bony avulsions on X-ray (tensile strength of the
cuff exceeds adjacent bone). Treat conservatively initially with analgesia
and support in a broad arm sling, followed by exercises/physiotherapy
at ≈10days. Arrange follow-up for patients with signiﬁcantly drange of
movement—complete tears (particularly in younger patients) may require
surgical repair.
Ruptured biceps
The long head of biceps can rupture at its proximal insertion on lifting or
pulling (see b Soft tissue elbow problems, p.452). This may follow little
force (and with little pain) in the elderly. Look for the ruptured biceps
muscle as a bulge above the elbow. Treat with initial analgesia and support
in a sling, followed by later exercises. Surgical repair is rarely indicated.
460    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Soft tissue shoulder problems
      The shoulder is vulnerable to degenerative disease and injury, due to its
      extreme mobility and hence, relative instability. Stability relies mainly on
      the rotator cuff, a muscle sheath, which wraps around and inserts into the
      humeral head under the deltoid. The rotator cuff comprises supraspinatus
      (initiates abduction), infraspinatus and teres minor (externally rotate), and
      subscapularis (internally rotates). The rotator cuff may be injured acutely
      or due to a chronic degenerative process (eg impingement syndromes or
      rheumatoid arthritis).
      Impingement syndromes
      The acromion process may compress or ‘impinge’ on the underlying sub-
      acromial bursa and rotator cuff during repetitive or strenuous shoulder
      use. Supraspinatus and its tendon are most commonly affected. Minor
      impingement is associated with inﬂammation, pain, and loss of function
      and is reversible with treatment. Rotator cuff tendonitis is more chronic
      and can lead to degeneration or tearing of the cuff. Although rotator cuff
      tendonitis and degenerative tears usually occur in later life, acute tears can
      occur in younger patients.
      Examination of the shoulder
      Examine both shoulders for comparison with the patient sitting relaxed.
      Look for deformity of the clavicle or sternoclavicular joint, AC joint
      deformity (eg OA or injury), wasting of the deltoid muscle (axillary nerve
      damage), a step in the deltoid contour, or a gap below the acromion
      (subluxation or dislocation).
      Feel for tenderness over sternoclavicular joint, clavicle, AC joint,
      subacromial area, rotator cuff insertion, biceps tendon insertion.
      Move the shoulder gently in all directions to test passive movements. Test
      strength of active movements. Test abduction (normal range 0–170°),
      forward ﬂexion (0–160°), backward extension (0–60°), external rotation
      (put hand on back of head), internal rotation (put hand behind back to
      touch shoulder blade).
      Examine for crepitus on movement, restriction, pain (note any painful
      arc) and weakness of particular movements.
      Test sensation over the badge area (upper outer arm) supplied by axillary
      nerve. Examine the cervical spine when shoulder examination does not
      reveal a cause for symptoms.
      In suspected impingement syndromes consider the following:
      Neer’s impingement test Fully abducting the straight arm will re-create
      symptoms.
      Hawkin’s impingement test Hold the arm at 90° abduction and 90° elbow
      ﬂexion. Rotating the arm across the body will recreate symptoms.
      LA injection of 10mL 1% plain lidocaine into the subacromial bursa
      (approach just under acromion process from behind) should help pain, but
      will not affect strength or range of movement, aiding assessment. Adding
      hydrocortisone, methylprednisolone or triamcinolone to LA injection is
      useful for ﬁrst presentation of acute impingement. Warn that symptoms
      may ibrieﬂy after steroid injection. Avoid repeated injection as it can
      precipitate tendon rupture.
                                    SOFT TISSUE SHOULDER PROBLEMS               461

Differential diagnosis of shoulder pain
Includes referred pain from a degenerative cervical spine, C5/6 disc pro-
lapse, brachial plexus neuritis, axillary vein thrombosis, suprascapular
nerve compression, Pancoast’s syndrome, or cervical rib.
Subacromial bursitis
Early form of impingement in younger patients. Follows unaccustomed
activity or exercise. Look for a painful arc of 60–100° abduction with
dull, aching pain, worse on activity. Differential diagnosis includes gout,
sepsis, or RA. Treat with analgesia, NSAID, and ice. Demonstrate simple
exercises (eg gentle pendulum swings and circling movements of the arm,
crawling ﬁngers up a wall). LA injection will improve pain, movement, and
help conﬁrm diagnosis. Consider steroid injection if ﬁrst presentation.
Rotator cuff tendonitis
Usually a longer history, chronic pain (±sleep disturbance), in patients aged
25–40years. Examine for tenderness and crepitus over humeral insertions
of the rotator cuff and dactive and passive shoulder movements. X-ray
may show osteophytes or subacromial calciﬁcation. LA injection may
dpain, but usually does not istrength or range of movement. Treat as for
subacromial bursitis. In more severe cases, consider formal physiotherapy
and orthopaedic referral.
Calciﬁc tendonitis
A poorly understood process of calcium deposition and resorption
within the rotator cuff tendon. Commoner in women. May be related to
degenerative change or follow minor trauma. Most common site is within
supraspinatus 1–2cm proximal to humeral insertion. Acute pain (occurs
during periods of calcium resorption, granulation, and healing) often starts
at rest, worsens on movement and at night. Examine for tenderness at the
rotator cuff insertion. There may be crepitus, painful limitation of move-
ment or a painful arc. The calcium deposits may be evident on X-ray.
Most episodes spontaneously resolve in 1–2weeks. Treat with analgesia,
NSAID, and ice. Immobilize brieﬂy in a broad arm sling, but start gentle
exercises (as above) once symptoms allow. Arrange orthopaedic
follow-up; steroid injection and/or physiotherapy and, rarely, surgical
treatment, may be required.
Adhesive capsulitis
A misleading term, since it is caused by a generalized contracture of the
shoulder capsule, not adhesions. Causes include immobilization, injury, or
diabetes. Commoner in women and rare <40 or >70years old. Insidious
onset results in diffuse, aching pain (worse at night) and restricted active
and passive shoulder movements. The cuff is usually not tender. X-rays
exclude posterior dislocation (b p.456). Refer to orthopaedics for MUA,
arthroscopy, and capsulotomy.
462    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Soft tissue neck injuries
      Neck sprains
      Neck injuries that do not involve fractures, dislocations, ligamentous laxity,
      or spinal cord damage are common. Most follow car crashes involving
      neck hyperextension. These injuries have been referred to as: ‘whiplash’
      or ‘whiplash-type’ injuries, ‘hyperextension’ or ‘acceleration ﬂexion—
      hyperextension’ injuries or most simply, ‘neck sprains’. Patients with con-
      tinuing symptoms are often referred to as having a ‘whiplash-associated
      disorder’. MRI (which rarely changes management) reveals many to have
      signiﬁcant soft tissue injuries.
      History
      Neck pain and stiffness may not appear until 12hr after injury—symptoms
      are typically maximal at ≈48hr. Ask about other symptoms (some are
      relatively common), which include: headache, shoulder pain, backache,
      altered limb sensation. A range of other symptoms may also occur,
      including: dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, and visual disturbance.
      Examination
      Perform a neurological examination. In fully alert, neurologically intact
      patients examine for any midline or paravertebral tenderness, muscle
      spasm or deformity. If there is no midline tenderness, assess active neck
      movements. If there is localized bony tenderness, pain on active move-
      ments or any neurological symptoms, immobilize fully and X-ray.
      X-ray1
      Arrange cervical X-rays (AP, lateral and odontoid peg views) in the pres-
      ence of high energy trauma, neurological symptoms or signs, dconscious
      level or serious injury elsewhere. In the absence of these, do not routinely
      X-ray if the patient is fully conscious, has no midline neck tenderness, and
      can rotate the neck by 45° to right and left.
      Check for evidence of fracture or dislocation. The most common
      abnormality is loss of the normal cervical lordosis (neck ‘straightening’)—
      this implies neck muscle spasm and does not necessarily indicate cervical
      spine injury. If the patient has severe pain or any abnormal neurology, but
      the initial plain X-rays are normal, consider requesting a CT scan.
      Treatment
      If there is any clinical or radiological suspicion of vertebral or spinal cord
      injury, refer urgently, maintaining cervical spine immobilization.
      Treat patients in whom there is no suspicion of spinal cord or vertebral
      injury with initial analgesia (eg co-dydramol and/or ibuprofen) and advise
      GP follow-up. Leave referral to a physiotherapist for the GP to decide,
      based upon progression of symptoms. Avoid the use of a soft collar (the
      evidence is against it), but instead encourage early mobilization.
      Prognosis
      The rate of resolution of symptoms after neck sprains is highly variable.
      Many patients (>40%) continue to complain of pain, stiffness, and other
      symptoms for many months. It is often difﬁcult to make a long-term
      prognosis within 12 months of the injury.
      1 Available at: www.ohri.ca/emerg/cdr/cspine.html
                                           SOFT TISSUE NECK INJURIES           463

Non-traumatic neck pain
Neck pain without injury may result from a variety of causes:
• Cervical disc herniations: present with neck pain, sensory and motor
  signs. Even if X-rays are normal, refer for further investigation (such as
  MRI) and treatment.
• Acute torticollis (‘wry neck’) reﬂects painful sternocleidomastoid spasm,
  which may occur on waking or after sudden neck movement. It responds
  to NSAID, local heat (eg heat pad or hot water bottle), and (in severe
  cases), physiotherapy.
• Referred pain: eg tonsillitis/quinsy (especially in children).
• Dystonic reactions: eg drug-induced (see b Complications of psychiatric
  drugs, p.619).
• Cervical arthritis: including both OA and RA.
464    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Facial wounds
      See also the sections on bony facial injuries (b pp. 370–376).
      Cosmetic considerations
      These are very important. The ﬁnal appearance of a scar depends partly upon
      the orientation of the wound and its relation to natural skin lines (modiﬁed
      from Langer’s description), but also upon initial management. Cleaning is
      crucial, but do not debride with tissue excision in the ED. Consider suturing
      facial dog bites (b p.414) and non-contaminated facial wounds up to 24hr
      after injury (get senior advice ﬁrst). Close facial wounds in layers, using 5/0
      Dexon or Vicryl for deeper layers, with knots tied on the deep aspect. Aim
      to remove skin sutures (interrupted 6/0 non-absorbable monoﬁlament) at
      3 days and replace with Steri-Strips™ to minimize scarring. Consider GA
      to treat facial wounds in children.
      Damage to parotid duct/gland and facial nerve
      This is particularly likely with incised wounds in the pre-auricular area.
      The facial nerve emerges through the parotid gland to supply the muscles
      of facial expression: unrepaired injury results in permanent disﬁgurement.
      The parotid duct runs transversely forwards from the anterior portion
      of the gland, parallel and inferior to the zygomatic arch, before entering
      the mouth opposite the second upper molar (look for blood here, as this
      implies proximal duct injury). Refer for exploration in theatre if there is
      clinical suspicion of involvement of any of these structures.
      Associated head injury
      Consider the possibility of signiﬁcant head or neck injury in all patients
      with a facial wound.
      Speciﬁc wounds
      Lip wounds Oppose the vermilion border accurately (it is often easiest
      to do this ﬁrst). Remember that even a 1mm mismatch will result in a
      permanent visible abnormality. Close in layers if the wound extends into
      subcutaneous or muscle layers.
      Tongue and oral wounds Check the teeth: if any are broken or missing,
      consider obtaining soft tissue lateral X-rays of the lips in a search for
      embedded fragments. Small superﬁcial lacerations need not be closed, but
      close deeper ones in layers, using absorbable sutures (eg 4/0 or 5/0 Vicryl/
      Dexon for mucosal surfaces). Close through and through oral lacerations
      in layers (mucosa, muscle, and subcutaneous tissue, skin).
      Eyebrow wounds Do not shave the eyebrows. Exclude an underlying
      fracture by palpation (and X-rays, as appropriate).
      Eyelid wounds Many may be sutured with 6/0 non-absorbable monoﬁla-
      ment. Full eye examination, excluding a FB, is necessary. Refer wounds if
      there is involvement of lid margin, loss of tissue, or if lacrimal duct (medial
      canthus) or gland (superolateral) injury is suspected.
      Ears Involvement of cartilage requires suture with ﬁne absorbable
      material (by an Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) specialist) prior to skin
      closure. Give prophylactic antibiotic cover (eg co-amoxiclav) if there is
      any contamination.
                             FACIAL WOUNDS   465

Langer’s lines (Fig. 9.33)

Fig. 9.33 Langer’s lines.
466    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Pelvic fractures
      Major pelvic fractures result from very high energy trauma and are true
      orthopaedic emergencies. Associated thoracic or abdominal injuries
      occur in 10–20%—the principal immediate risk is massive haemorrhage
      and exsanguination. Compound fractures of the pelvis have a mortality
      of >50%. Associated bladder or urethral damage is common. Rectal and
      vaginal injuries occur occasionally.
      Assessment
      • Resuscitate as for any severely traumatized patient (b Major trauma:
        treatment principles, p.320).
      • Obtain a pelvic X-ray on all patients with multisystem injury
        (b p.322).
      • Look carefully for evidence of hypovolaemia and treat appropriately.
      • Examine pubis, iliac bones, hips, and sacrum for tenderness, bruising,
        swelling, or crepitus. Do not try to ‘spring the pelvis’ to assess
        stability—this is unreliable, unnecessary, and may cause additional
        haemorrhage/damage. Similarly, avoid log rolling patients with obvious
        pelvis fractures—enlist a number of helpers and perform a straight lift.
      • Look carefully for wounds especially in the perineum.
      • Perform a rectal examination for anal tone, palpable fractures and to
        detect bleeding, rectal tears, and urethral damage (high riding, boggy
        prostate).
      • Test urine for blood, but do not catheterize if urethral injury is
        suspected.
      • Look at X-rays carefully for disruption of normal pelvic contours
        (Shenton’s lines), asymmetry and widening of the pubic symphysis or
        sacroiliac joints.
      Classiﬁcation of pelvic fractures (Table 9.3)
      Table 9.3 Tile classiﬁcation of pelvic injuries (see Fig. 9.34)
      Type A    (Stable injuries) include avulsion fractures, isolated pubic ramus
                fractures, iliac wing fractures, or single stable fractures elsewhere in
                pelvic ring
      Type B    Rotationally unstable but vertically stable
      B1        ‘Open book’ antero-posterior compression fractures, causing
                separation of the pubic symphysis and widening of one or both
                sacroiliac joints
      B2        Ipsilateral compression causing the pubic bones to fracture and
                override
      B3        Contralateral compression injury resulting in pubic rami fractures on
                one side and compression sacroiliac injury on the other
      Type C    (Rotationally unstable and vertically unstable) The pelvic ring is
                completely disrupted or displaced at 2 or more points. Associated
                with massive blood loss and very high mortality. Subdivided into C1
                (unilateral), C2 (bilateral) and C3 (involving acetabular fracture)
                                                      PELVIC FRACTURES           467

Treatment
Stable type A injuries require analgesia and bed rest until able to mobi-
lize (usually 3–6weeks). Isolated pubic ramus fractures are common and
often missed in the elderly (particularly when the focus is on a potential
fractured neck of femur). Refer to orthopaedics for analgesia, initial bed
rest, then mobilization.
Unstable type B and C fractures are an orthopaedic emergency
Resuscitate as for any major trauma (b p.320). Correct hypovolaemia,
anticipate coagulopathy and ensure blood is rapidly available as massive
transfusion may be required. If DPL (b p.347) is employed, use a supra-
umbilical approach, as pelvic haematoma may track up the abdominal
wall. Minimize movement, but support an obviously unstable pelvis frac-
ture associated with severe haemorrhage using a pelvic binder or splint
(eg SAM sling). Consider reduction and immobilization using an external
ﬁxator applied either in the resuscitation room or operating theatre to
halt haemorrhage. If this fails, angiography and selective embolization are
indicated.

                                Type B1 fracture

                                Type C1 fracture
Fig. 9.34 Examples of pelvic fractures.

Avulsion fractures around the pelvis
Avulsion fractures occur at attachments of various muscles as follows:
• Anterior inferior iliac spine—rectus femoris (typically results from a
  miskick into the turf).
• Anterior superior iliac spine—sartorius.
• Ischial tuberosity—hamstrings.
In most instances, symptomatic treatment based upon rest (consider
crutches) and analgesia sufﬁces. Larger avulsions (particularly of the ischial
tuberosity) may require internal ﬁxation (to avoid complications such as
non-union).
468    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Hip dislocations and acetabular fractures
      Acetabular fractures
      Often accompany traumatic hip dislocation following violent injury such
      as falls or blows to the hip. Posterior rim fractures are the most common.
      Complications include massive haemorrhage, sciatic nerve damage,
      myositis ossiﬁcans, and secondary OA. Resuscitate, give analgesia and deal
      with priorities ﬁrst. Additional X-rays (eg 45° oblique ‘Judet’ views) or CT
      are often required to make an exact diagnosis. Refer to orthopaedics for
      traction, protected weight-bearing, or in some cases internal ﬁxation.
      Central dislocation of the hip
      This injury is essentially a serious pelvic fracture, which involves the
      head of the femur being driven through the (fractured) acetabular ﬂoor
      following a fall or force directed along the length of the femur (eg car
      dashboard). The diagnosis is usually obvious on an AP pelvis X-ray. Treat
      associated injuries and for shock, and give analgesia. Contact the ortho-
      paedic surgeon immediately.
      Traumatic posterior dislocation of the hip
      Implies major trauma, often with other critical injuries (eg dashboard knee
      injury in a car crash) or fractured posterior acetabulum. Limb is short-
      ened, internally rotated with hip ﬂexed and adducted. This appearance
      may be absent if there is also a femoral shaft fracture. Check for sciatic
      nerve damage—examine foot dorsiﬂexion and below knee sensation.
      Complications: sciatic nerve injury, avascular necrosis of femoral head (risk
      i the longer the hip is dislocated), and secondary OA. Diagnosis is usually
      obvious on AP X-ray, but lateral views may be needed to exclude dislocation.
      Treat as follows:
      • Resuscitate the patient and deal with A, B, C priorities ﬁrst.
      • Give analgesia—posterior dislocation causes severe pain.
      • Refer for reduction under GA. In unconscious, multiply injured patients,
         consider an early attempt to reduce the dislocation.
      Reduction technique for posterior dislocation (‘Allis technique’)
      • It is easiest and safest to reduce the dislocation if the anaesthetized
         patient is placed on the ﬂoor. If this is not possible, stand on the trolley.
         An assistant presses down on the patient’s anterior superior iliac spines
         to hold down the pelvis.
      • Flex hip and knee both to 90°, and correct adduction and internal
         rotation deformities.
      • Grip the patient’s lower leg between your knees and grasp patient’s
         knee with both hands.
      • Lean back and lever the knee up pulling the patients hip upwards.
         A ‘clunk’ conﬁrms successful reduction. X-ray to conﬁrm reduction.
      Dislocated hip prostheses
      Relatively common, follows minor trauma. Conﬁrm posterior dislocation
      of hip prosthesis by X-ray. Treat with IV opioid and refer to orthopaedics
      for MUA (and assessment of prosthesis stability) under GA.
      Anterior dislocation of the hip
      Less common. The leg is held abducted and externally rotated. Complications
      include damage to the femoral nerve, artery, and vein. Give analgesia and
      refer for reduction under GA.
                               SACRAL AND COCCYGEAL FRACTURES                  469

Sacral and coccygeal fractures
Fractures of the sacrum
Usually occur from violent direct trauma such as falls. Damage to sacral
nerve roots may occur. Check carefully for saddle anaesthesia, danal tone,
lower limb weakness, or bladder dysfunction. Refer to the orthopaedic
team.
Fracture of the coccyx
Follows a fall onto the bottom. Do not X-ray routinely—the diagnosis
is clinical. Perform a rectal examination and check for local coccygeal
tenderness, palpable fractures, or evidence of rectal damage. Refer patients
with rectal tears to the general surgeon. Refer to the orthopaedic team if
the coccyx is grossly displaced, as it may require manipulation under LA
or even excision. Treat the remainder symptomatically (eg suggest a ring
cushion and provide analgesia).
470    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Hip fractures
      Intracapsular fractures of the neck of femur
      Can follow relatively minor trauma. Risk i in the elderly, because of
      osteoporosis, osteomalacia, and irate of falls. These fractures can disrupt
      the blood supply to the femoral head, causing avascular necrosis.
      Fractures around the hip in younger patients imply high energy injury: the
      incidence of non-union or avascular necrosis may be as high as 20%.
      Diagnosis
      Usually follows a fall onto the hip or bottom. Pain may radiate down
      towards the knee. The affected leg may be shortened and externally
      rotated. Check for hypothermia and dehydration (the patient may have
      been lying for hours). Look for tenderness over the hip or greater
      trochanter, particularly on rotation. Suspect hip fracture in an elderly
      person who:
      • Exhibits sudden inability to WB. There may be no history of injury,
        particularly in the presence of confusion or dementia.
      • Is unable to WB and has pain in the knee (the hip may not be painful).
      • Has ‘Gone off her feet’.
      X-rays
      Look closely for disrupted trabeculae/cortices and abnormal pelvic
      contours (Shenton’s lines). Fractures of the femoral neck are not always
      visible on initial X-rays. Repeat X-rays, bone scanning, or MRI may be
      required if symptoms continue. Intracapsular femoral neck fractures may
      be graded according to the Garden classiﬁcation.
      Treatment
      • Obtain IV access and draw blood for U&E, glucose, FBC, and
        cross-match.
      • Start IV infusion if indicated (eg dehydration or shock).
      • Give IV analgesia plus an anti-emetic. Provide all analgesia IV in small
        increments every few minutes until pain is controlled.
      • Obtain an ECG to look for arrhythmias/MI and consider need for CXR.
      • Arrange other investigations as indicated by history/examination.
      • Admit to orthopaedic ward.
      Intertrochanteric fracture
      These affect the base of the femoral neck and the intertrochanteric region.
      Initial management is identical to neck of femur fractures outlined above.
      Isolated trochanteric avulsion fracture
      Sudden force may avulse insertions of gluteus medius (greater trochanter)
      or iliopsoas (lesser trochanter). Give analgesia and refer for follow-up for
      gradual mobilization and symptomatic treatment.
                                                                 HIP FRACTURES            471

The Garden classiﬁcation (Fig. 9.35)

                Garden I

                                                            Garden II

               Garden III                                   Garden IV
Fig. 9.35 The Garden classiﬁcation.
Garden I: trabeculae angulated, but inferior cortex intact. No signiﬁcant displacement.
Garden II: trabeculae in line, but a fracture line visible from superior to inferior
cortex. No signiﬁcant displacement.
Garden III: obvious complete fracture line with slight displacement and/or rotation
of the femoral head.
Garden IV: gross, often complete, displacement of the femoral head.

Hip pain after injury, but no fracture
Elderly patients who report hip pain and struggle to walk after a fall, but
yet have no fracture of hip or pubic rami on X-ray may need assessment
by an occupational therapist or physiotherapist before deciding if they
can be safely discharged home with analgesia and appropriate walking aid.
A small, but signiﬁcant, proportion of such patients will turn out to have
a hip fracture. Therefore, arrange for all patients to return for further
imaging (eg MRI or CT) if pain continues for more than 1 week. In some
patients with very signiﬁcant symptoms, consider requesting MRI or CT
scan at the time of initial presentation to show up a hip fracture not
identiﬁed on plain X-rays.
472    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Shaft of femur fractures
      Enormous force is required to break an undiseased adult femoral shaft.
      Fractures are frequently associated with multisystem trauma. Treatment
      of immediately life-threatening injuries takes priority. Transverse, spiral,
      or segmental shaft fractures usually result from falls, crushing injuries, or
      high-speed road trafﬁc collisions. There is often associated dislocation of
      the hip or other serious injury to the pelvis, hip, and knee.
      Complications
      Closed fractures of the femoral shaft, even without obvious vascular
      injury, may be associated with marked blood loss. Up to 1.5L of blood
      may be lost without visible thigh swelling. Rarely, gross blood loss may
      occur from compound femoral fractures. Later complications include fat
      embolism/ARDS. The incidence of complications is d by early splintage
      and early deﬁnitive treatment (usually closed intramedullary nailing).
      Diagnosis
      The diagnosis is usually clear on examination with deformity, shortening,
      external rotation and abduction at the hip on the affected side. The frac-
      ture may be felt or even heard on movement of the lower limb. Carefully
      check for associated pelvic, knee, or distal limb injuries or for the presence
      of associated wounds. Document sensation and pulses in the limb and
      re-check frequently.
      Treatment
      Before X-rays, resuscitate, exclude life-threatening injuries, replace IV
      ﬂuids, give adequate analgesia, and splint fractures as follows:
      • Assess ABCs, establish priorities, and resuscitate.
      • Start ﬂuid replacement via 2 large-bore IV cannulae.
      • Obtain blood for cross-matching.
      • Administer IV analgesia—give small increments of opioid (with an
        anti-emetic) until pain is controlled,
      • Strongly consider femoral nerve block (b p.304). As this starts to take
        effect (≈5–10min), prepare splintage and immobilize in Thomas or other
        traction splint.
      • Arrange X-rays of the femur and contact the orthopaedic team.
      Subtrochanteric fractures
      Involve the most proximal part of the femoral shaft, at or just distal to the
      trochanters. Typically involve high-energy trauma in younger patients and
      are often associated with other serious injuries. They can also occur as iso-
      lated injuries following relatively minor trauma in those with osteoporosis
      or metastatic disease. Treat as for femoral shaft fractures.
      Supracondylar fractures
      Fractures of the distal third of the femur usually follow violent direct force.
      They are frequently comminuted and often intra-articular with associated
      damage to the knee joint. In adults, the distal femoral fragment tends to
      rotate due to pull from gastrocnemius. Treat as for femoral shaft frac-
      tures, but note that femoral nerve block may not be as effective.
                                           SHAFT OF FEMUR FRACTURES               473

Splints for fractured femoral shaft
The Thomas splint is traditional, but other forms of telescopic, metal, or
pneumatic traction splints are increasingly being used. These are conven-
ient, and particularly suitable for temporary immobilization in patients
going directly to theatre or in transit to hospital. Ensure adequate padding
around the groin and the ankle to avoid pressure necrosis of the skin.
Application of a Thomas splint
• Measure circumference of the uppermost part of the uninjured thigh
  in cm.
• Select splint of appropriate ring size (also have sizes above and below
  ready).
• Prepare splintage—wrap ring in wool roll.
• Slide sleeve of tubigrip over splint to support leg from ring to distal calf.
  Secure tubigrip by tying to ring or taping along sides of splint. If the ring
  has a buckle this should be on the upper half of the ring.
• Prepare the limb for skin traction—gently. If time permits, shave hair
  from medial and lateral aspects of limb.
• Apply splint (if using femoral nerve block wait until this is effective).
  Start with adhesive skin traction, making sure the foam part adequately
  covers the malleoli. Remove backing and apply adhesive tape along sides
  up limb, extending as far up the limb as possible. Trim off the remaining
  tape.
• Wrap the leg from ankle to mid-thigh with gauze bandage.
• Apply traction to the leg. Gently pull the ankle with one hand and
  support the knee with the other. Correct the abduction and external
  rotation while pulling steadily.
• Slide the Thomas splint over the leg until it is against the perineum.
  Take care not to snag the skin or genitalia. If the splint does not ﬁt,
  replace it while maintaining traction.
• Tie the cords from the heel end of the skin traction to the end of the
  splint while maintaining traction. Insert 2 tongue depressors between
  the cords and twist them until the cords are reasonably taut.
• Place wool roll padding under the thigh and if necessary, add more
  padding around the groin.
• Bandage around the whole splint from thigh to lower calf with a broad
  bandage.
• Support and elevate the leg on a pillow.
• Check distal pulses.
• Arrange X-rays.
474    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Approach to knee injuries
      History
      Many knee injuries seen in the ED result from sports, particularly foot-
      ball and rugby. Carefully document the exact mechanism of injury as it
      provides clues to the diagnosis. Valgus or varus stresses can damage the
      medial and lateral collateral ligaments, respectively. Flexed, twisting knee
      injuries are frequently associated with meniscal injuries. The anterior cru-
      ciate ligament (isolated or associated with medial collateral and/or medial
      meniscal injuries) may tear during forced ﬂexion or hyperextension.
      Posterior cruciate ligament injuries may follow falls or dashboard impact
      where the tibia is forced backwards violently (often associated with medial
      or lateral ligament injuries).
      Rapid onset tense swelling in a knee is usually an acute haemarthrosis.
      Swelling developing more gradually over several days is more likely to
      represent a reactive effusion. Ask about previous knee problems: swelling,
      clicking, locking, or giving way (the last two suggest underlying meniscal
      pathology). Document any previous knee surgery or the presence of
      other joint problems. In a hot, swollen, painful, and stiff knee without a
      history of signiﬁcant trauma consider and exclude septic arthritis.
      Examination
      Always examine both legs with the patient suitably undressed and lying
      supine. If there is much discomfort, consider giving oral analgesia and
      re-examine in 10–15min. Reassure him/her that you will not suddenly pull
      or move the leg without warning.
      Look for bruising, swelling, redness, abrasions, or other wounds.
      Feel for warmth, crepitation, or the presence of a knee effusion (patellar
      tap or ballottable ﬂuid).
      Ask the patient to straight leg raise The ability to do this against resistance
      virtually excludes quadriceps, patellar tendon rupture, or transverse
      patellar fractures. If unable (possibly due to pain), ask the patient to kick
      forwards whilst sitting with the affected leg dangling free.
      Assess tone and bulk of quadriceps muscle and compare with the other
      side.
      Assess knee movement Gentle encouragement or supporting the limb
      may be required, but do not use any force.
      Assess the cruciate ligaments Try to bring the knee to 90° ﬂexion, sit on
      the patient’s foot and hold the leg with both hands around the upper tibia.
      Ensure the quadriceps and hamstring muscles are relaxed. Using body
      weight, gently rock backwards and forwards looking for anterior glide
      (draw) of the tibia (indicating rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament)
      or posterior glide of the tibia (indicating rupture of the posterior cruciate
      ligament). Up to 5mm movement is normal—always compare both
      legs. If unable to ﬂex to 90°, assess with slight ﬂexion ≈10°. Repeat the
      procedure with the tibia slightly internally rotated.
                                         APPROACH TO KNEE INJURIES             475

Assess the collateral ligaments With the leg straight, gently apply a valgus
stress to the knee joint (ie move the lower leg laterally) examining for
laxity or pain in the medial collateral ligament. Next apply a varus stress
(ie move the lower leg medially) examining for laxity or pain in the lateral
collateral ligament complex. Repeat the procedure with the knee in ≈20°
ﬂexion as this will relax the cruciate ligaments. Compare both sides.
Palpate around the knee joint examining all the structures around the
knee for tenderness, swelling, warmth, or crepitus (eg bony landmarks,
ligament insertions, and over the joint line medially and laterally).
X-rays for knee injuries
X-rays form the mainstay of initial imaging for knee trauma: other imaging
(eg CT, MRI) may be indicated after specialist consultation. Obtain X-rays
following knee injuries where there is suspected fracture or other signiﬁ-
cant injury. Use the Ottawa knee rules to assist the decision (in those
aged between 18 and 55 years) as to whether or not to X-ray:
X-rays are only required if any of the following are present:
• There is isolated bony tenderness of the patella.
• There is bony tenderness over the ﬁbula head.
• The patient cannot ﬂex the knee to 90°.
• The patient could not weight-bear (take at least 4 steps) both immedi-
  ately after the injury and at the time of examination.
Adopt a lower threshold for obtaining X-rays in those aged <18 or
>55years, patients intoxicated with alcohol, those suffering from bone
disease (eg RA, documented osteoporosis), and for those who reattend
the ED with the same injury (having not been X-rayed initially).
476    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Knee fractures and dislocations
      Patellar fracture
      This may follow a direct blow or fall onto the patella or sudden violent
      knee ﬂexion or contraction of the quadriceps muscle. Look for pain,
      swelling, crepitus, and difﬁculty extending the knee. Displaced, transverse
      fractures result in an inability to straight leg raise (this is also a feature of
      rupture of the quadriceps tendon or patellar tendon—b Soft tissue knee
      injuries, p.478). There may be an associated haemarthrosis.
      X-rays may be difﬁcult to interpret as the patella overlies the distal femur
      on the AP view and can obscure subtle fractures. Do not routinely order
      ‘skyline’ views of the patella. Take care not to mistake a bipartite patella
      for a fracture (the accessory bone is typically in the upper, lateral part of
      the patella).
      Treatment
      • Treat vertical fractures with analgesia, immobilize in a non-weight-
        bearing cylinder POP, supply crutches, and arrange orthopaedic
        follow-up.
      • Transverse fractures tend to displace due to the pull of quadriceps.
        Treat with analgesia, immobilization in a POP backslab, and refer to
        the orthopaedic team for probable ORIF (occasionally, the orthopaedic
        team may decide to treat an undisplaced transverse fracture conserva-
        tively).
      Dislocation of the patella
      The patella typically dislocates laterally. This often follows medial stress
      to the knee—the dislocation may reduce spontaneously. There may be
      a history of recurrent dislocation. The patient has a painful knee, held in
      ﬂexion with obvious lateral displacement of the patella. X-rays are not
      generally required prior to reduction of the dislocation. Reduction can
      usually be achieved using Entonox®—IV analgesia is seldom required.
      Stand on the lateral side of the affected limb and hold the affected knee
      gently. Using a thumb, lever the patella medially in one smooth, ﬁrm
      movement whilst gently extending the knee at the same time. Successful
      reduction is obvious and should rapidly relieve symptoms. Once reduced,
      obtain X-rays, immobilize in a canvas (‘cricket pad’) back-splint or cylinder
      cast POP, provide analgesia and arrange orthopaedic follow-up. Surgery is
      not usually indicated for ﬁrst time dislocations.
      Spontaneous reduction/patella subluxation The patient who has
      experienced spontaneous reduction and/or subluxation prior to arrival at
      hospital will typically have maximal tenderness over the medial aspect of
      the upper patella reﬂecting damage to the attachment of vastus medialis.
      There may be ‘apprehension’ when gentle lateral pressure is applied to the
      patella. If clinical features are dramatic, rest in a splint (occasionally cylinder
      POP may be needed), otherwise refer for physiotherapy and orthopaedic
      follow-up.
                                KNEE FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS                   477

Dislocation of the knee
Although rare, this injury indicates severe disruption of the ligamentous
structures and soft tissues of the knee. Look carefully for associated
injuries (eg femur or lower limb), and document distal pulses and
sensation—the popliteal artery or nerve are often injured. Reduction
requires adequate (IV opioid) analgesia, and usually GA or sedation with
full precautions. Reduce by simple traction on the limb and correcting
deformity. Check distal pulses and sensation after reduction, immobilize
in a long leg POP backslab, and arrange orthopaedic admission. Check
the circulation repeatedly, since popliteal artery damage may not become
apparent for some hours—angiography is usually required. Compartment
syndrome is another recognized complication.
Tibial plateau fractures
Falls onto an extended leg can cause compression fractures of the
proximal tibia. Valgus stresses crush or fracture the lateral tibial plateau.
These injuries are commonly seen in pedestrians injured following
impact with car bumpers. Varus injuries result in crushing or fracture of
the medial tibial plateau and are usually associated with rupture of the
opposite collateral ligaments. Examine for tenderness over the medial
or lateral margins of the proximal tibia. Look for swelling, haemarthrosis,
or ligamentous instability (also try to assess the cruciate ligaments—b
Approach to knee injuries, p.474). Look carefully on X-rays for breaks in
the articular surfaces of the proximal tibia, avulsions from the ligamentous
attachments, or loss of height from the medial and lateral tibial plateaux,
but beware, this may be subtle.
Treat with immobilization in a long leg POP backslab following adequate
analgesia and refer to orthopaedic staff. Fractures of the tibial plateau often
require elevation ±ORIF with bone grafting. Admit all patients with an
acute haemarthrosis. Treat small, isolated avulsions without haemarthro-
sis with immobilization, crutches, and analgesia, and arrange orthopaedic
follow-up.
Posterolateral corner injuries
The posterolateral corner of the knee is comprised of a group of ligaments
and muscles/tendons that add to the stability of the joint. Postero-lateral
corner injuries often occur in association with other signiﬁcant knee
trauma (eg dislocations, rupture of anterior or posterior cruciate liga-
ments, but isolated injuries can occur. Suspect this injury when signiﬁcant
symptoms follow the application of varus force to the anteromedial aspect
of the extended knee. Chronic instability can result. X-rays may be normal
or show subtle avulsions or widening of the lateral joint space. Urgent
MRI and orthopaedic referral will enable prompt treatment.
478    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Soft tissue knee injuries
      Acute haemarthrosis
      Rapid onset swelling following a knee injury, often warm, tense, and
      painful. Common causes include cruciate ligament rupture, tibial avulsion,
      tibial plateau, or other fractures. An acute haemarthrosis indicates serious
      injury. Refer for orthopaedic appraisal following splintage, analgesia and
      appropriate X-rays. Aspiration of a haemarthrosis (advocated by some
      experts to provide analgesia) requires strict aseptic technique.
      Cruciate ligament rupture
      The combination of considerable pain and swelling can make it difﬁcult to
      elicit classical physical signs of a fresh cruciate tear. A history of an audible
      ‘pop’ at the time of injury is highly suggestive of anterior cruciate rupture.
      Anterior cruciate tears often occur in association with tears of the medial
      collateral ligament and/or medial meniscus. Examine for the presence of
      haemarthrosis, abnormal ianterior glide of the tibia (‘+ve anterior draw
      test’) and injuries to the medial collateral ligament or other structures.
      Look carefully at X-rays for avulsion of the anterior tibial spine (anterior
      cruciate insertion). Give analgesia and refer to the orthopaedic surgeon.
      In posterior cruciate ligament tears, the tibia may appear to sag back
      when the knee is ﬂexed, so the tibia can be pulled into a more normal
      position causing a ‘false +ve’ anterior draw. X-rays may reveal the relevant
      posterior tibial spine to be avulsed. Provide analgesia and refer.
      Collateral ligament injuries
      Tenderness over the medial or lateral collateral ligament, with pain at this
      site on stress testing, indicates collateral ligament injury. Most injuries are
      isolated, and have no associated haemarthrosis and no abnormality on
      X-ray. Compare the injured knee with the uninjured one. The degree of
      laxity on stress testing will help to guide treatment:
      • Local tenderness with no laxity (or very slight laxity) implies a grade I
         injury. Treat with analgesia, physiotherapy (±crutches) in the expecta-
         tion of full recovery in 2–4weeks.
      • Local tenderness with minor/moderate laxity, but with a deﬁnite end-
         point implies a grade II injury. Provide analgesia, crutches, instruction on
         quadriceps exercises and refer for orthopaedic follow-up.
      • Major laxity (ie the joint opening up >1cm) with no end-point implies
         complete rupture. Consider a POP cylinder (or splint), and provide
         crutches, analgesia, quadriceps exercises, and orthopaedic follow-up.
      Ruptured quadriceps
      Complete rupture of the distal quadriceps insertion can result from a
      direct injury or from sudden, violent contraction of the quadriceps muscle.
      Examination reveals complete inability to straight leg raise—never assume
      this is just due to pain. There may be a palpable defect in the muscle inser-
      tion. Refer to the orthopaedic surgeon for repair.
      Ruptured patellar tendon
      Examine for complete inability to straight leg raise, a high-riding patella, a
      palpable defect in the patellar tendon. There is frequently an associated
      avulsion of the tibial tuberosity. Refer to orthopaedics for repair.
                                                   OTHER KNEE PROBLEMS              479

Other knee problems
Acutely locked knee
A springy block to full extension (which varies from just a few degrees to
much more) in the knee indicates an underlying meniscal injury or other
loose body in the knee joint. Obtain knee X-rays (including a tunnel view),
which may show a loose body. Do not attempt to unlock the knee by
manipulation as this is usually painful and futile. Give analgesia and refer
for arthroscopy.
Prepatellar and infrapatellar bursitis
This results from inﬂammation of the ﬂuid-ﬁlled bursa in front of or just
below the patella, respectively, typically from unaccustomed kneeling.
Treat with rest (which may involve the use of crutches), a short course of
NSAID, and avoidance of the causative activity. Persistent symptoms may
necessitate elective excision of the bursa. Infective bursitis may occur (iT°
and cellulitis are clues to this): aspirate ﬂuid for culture and sensitivity, and
start antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav).
Other causes of knee pain
Patients present not infrequently with knee pain of variable duration and
no history of trauma.
In adults, causes include Baker’s cyst, osteoarthritis (especially in the
elderly), and acute arthritic conditions, including septic arthritis (rare but
important). Also rare, but worthy of consideration is osteosarcoma, which
typically affects teenagers or young adults, producing pain and swelling.
In children, causes include sepsis (including both septic arthritis
and osteomyelitis (b The limping child, p.704), Osgood–Schlatter’s
disease, osteochondritis dissecans, Johansson–Larsen’s disease (all in b
Osteochondritis, p.708), chondromalacia patellae, referred pain from the
hip, malignancy (eg leukaemic deposits).
480    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Tibial and ﬁbular shaft fractures
      Adult tibial fractures are usually a result of direct blows or falls onto the
      tibial shaft. Spiral fractures of the tibia or ﬁbula follow violent twisting
      injuries, usually from sports (eg soccer, rugby, skiing). Displaced fractures
      typically involve both the tibia and the ﬁbula. A large portion of the tibia
      has relatively little soft tissue covering—compound injuries are common.
      Displaced tibial shaft fractures may be complicated by injury to the popliteal
      artery and compartment syndromes (b Crush syndrome, p.398). Fractures
      of the proximal ﬁbula may be associated with injury to the common pero-
      neal nerve. Check (repeatedly) for distal pulses and sensation.
      Diagnosis is usually easy. Look for deformity, localized swelling, or tenderness.
      Regard all wounds near the fracture site as potential compound injuries.
      X-rays Ensure X-rays show the whole length of tibia and ﬁbula. Examine
      closely for the presence of other injuries (eg around the knee or ankle).
      Undisplaced stress fractures can occur, particularly in adults involved in
      sports, and may not be visible on initial plain X-rays. Persisting symptoms
      suggestive of stress fracture require orthopaedic follow-up (and may
      eventually require speciﬁc coned X-rays or even bone scanning).
      Tibial shaft fractures
      Treat undisplaced transverse tibial shaft fractures with analgesia and long leg
      POP backslab. Spiral and oblique fractures also need immobilization, but are
      potentially unstable, so refer to orthopaedic team for admission. Immobilize
      displaced fractures in a long leg POP backslab following IV analgesia
      and refer (to consider MUA or closed intramedullary nailing). Badly com-
      minuted or segmental fractures may require ORIF. Contact orthopaedics
      immediately if suspected vascular injury, sensory deﬁcit or gross swelling.
      Treat compound fractures initially as on b p.422 and refer to the
      orthopaedic surgeon for urgent wound toilet, debridement, and
      ﬁxation—see www.boa.ac.uk/en/publications/boast
      Fibular shaft fractures
      These can occur in combination with a tibial fracture, as a result of a direct
      blow (eg from a car bumper) or from twisting injuries. The common
      peroneal nerve may be damaged in proximal ﬁbular injuries. Examine
      speciﬁcally for weakness of ankle dorsiﬂexion and dsensation of the lateral
      aspect of the forefoot.
      Treat undisplaced proximal or ﬁbular shaft fractures with analgesia and
      elevation. Support in a tubigrip or padded bandage. If unable to WB, use a
      below knee POP for comfort with crutches until WB is possible. Arrange
      follow-up in all cases. Refer displaced or comminuted fractures to the
      orthopaedic team.
      Stress fractures of the ﬁbula are relatively common, typically affecting the
      ﬁbular neck of military recruits and athletes following vigorous training.
      Treat symptomatically with rest and analgesia.
      Maisonneuve fracture (b p.501)
      Transmitted forces may fracture the proximal ﬁbula following an ankle
      injury. This usually involves fracture of the medial malleolus, fracture of
      the proximal ﬁbula or ﬁbular shaft, and implies damage to the distal tibio-
      ﬁbular syndesmosis. Examine the proximal ﬁbula in all ankle injuries and
      X-ray if locally tender.
                                               PRETIBIAL LACERATIONS           481

Pretibial lacerations
Common in the elderly following relatively minor trauma. Most pretibial
lacerations can be satisfactorily treated in the ED with adhesive strips
(‘Steri-Strips™’). Clean and irrigate to remove clot, and close using
Steri-Strips™ under appropriate anaesthesia. Aim to leave gaps of ≈0.5cm
between the Steri-Strips™. Apply a non-adherent dressing and light
compression bandage. Instruct the patient to elevate the limb whenever
possible (Fig. 9.36). Arrange follow-up (ED or GP) for 5 days’ time for
wound inspection and dressing change (but leave underlying Steri-Strips™
until the wound is healed). Consider admission for patients with poor
social support.
Note Suturing pretibial wounds is not usually recommended as the
pretibial skin is friable and undue tension compromises wound healing.
Complications are likely in patients with large, distally based and poorly
viable skin ﬂaps, and patients on steroids or anticoagulants (check clotting
control). Refer to plastic surgeons large lacerations where skin edges
cannot be opposed, or where complications are likely.

Fig. 9.36 Application of Steristrips.
482    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Calf and Achilles tendon injuries
      Calf muscle tears
      Acute tears of the gastrocnemius muscle often occur during sports. They can
      also occur simply from stepping from a bus or kerb, or from a sudden jump.
      Sharp or burning pain in the calf is followed by istiffness or pain on weight-
      bearing. Examine for localized tenderness and/or swelling over the calf muscle
      bellies. The medial head of gastrocnemius is more commonly injured.
      Carefully check the Achilles tendon for signs of rupture (see below).
      Differential diagnosis includes DVT (b p.118) or rupture of a Baker’s cyst.
      Treat with analgesia, NSAID, and initial ice application. Raising the heel with a
      pad may also help. Advise elevation of the leg and progressive weight-bearing
      as guided by symptoms. Use of crutches may be required if symptoms are
      severe (in this case, arrange follow-up and early physiotherapy).
      Calf muscle bruising
      Direct blunt calf trauma can result in haematoma formation and considerable
      swelling. Be alert to the possibility of compartment syndrome, particularly
      where there is a signiﬁcant mechanism of injury (eg b p.398).
      Achilles tendon rupture
      Achilles tendon rupture can occur without prior symptoms during sudden
      forceful contraction of the calf. Usually this occurs during sports (notori-
      ously badminton). It also occurs in other situations (eg running for a bus
      or missing a step and landing heavily). Patients on ciproﬂoxacin, oral ster-
      oids or with a history of steroid injection of the Achilles tendon area are
      at irisk. The patient often describes a sudden sharp pain behind the ankle
      like a ‘bang’ or similar description. Patients often mistakenly initially believe
      that they have sustained a blow to the back of the ankle. Examination
      may reveal swelling, pain, bruising, and often a (diagnostic) palpable defect
      (gap) in the tendon ≈5cm above the calcaneal insertion. Plantar ﬂexion
      against resistance will be weaker than on the normal (uninjured) side, but
      do not rely on this when making a diagnosis.
      Beware plantar ﬂexion (even standing on tip-toes) may still be possible
      due to action of the tibialis posterior, peroneal, and toe ﬂexor muscles.
      Calf squeeze test (Simmonds/Thompson’s test) Kneel patient on a chair,
      facing the back, with feet hanging free over the edge. Alternatively,
      position the patient to lie prone on a trolley with ankles over the end.
      Gently squeeze mid-calf and look for normal plantar ﬂexion of the ankle
      (Fig. 9.37). To avoid confusion do not describe the result as +ve or –ve,
      just state ‘calf squeeze test normal’ or ‘abnormal’.
      Treatment Remains controversial, so follow local policy. Treatment
      options are:
      • Conservative management: many ruptures are managed with crutches,
         analgesia, and immobilization for 6weeks in a long leg plaster with the
         ankle in plantar ﬂexion and knee ﬂexed to ≈45°. This is followed by
         careful rehabilitation under the care of the orthopaedic team and physi-
         otherapist.
      • Primary surgical repair is often employed in young patients and athletes.
         Refer to the orthopaedic team to consider this.
                                  CALF AND ACHILLES TENDON INJURIES                 483

Note Sometimes a ‘partial’ Achilles tendon rupture is suspected. In this
instance, the safest initial treatment is immobilization in a non-weight-bearing
BKPOP with ankle ﬂexion, crutches, and orthopaedic follow-up. USS can
help to determine the state of the tendon.

                       Tendon                            Tendon intact
                       rupture

                                                                     Foot plantar
                                                                        flexes

                                     No/reduced movement

Fig. 9.37 Calf squeeze test to check integrity of Achilles tendon.

Achilles tendonitis/paratendonitis
This frequently follows unaccustomed activity or overuse (eg dancing,
jumping, running, or even walking) and may be associated with familial
hypercholesterolaemia. There is usually a history of ipain, aggravated by
ankle movements. Examine for localized pain, swelling, and palpable crep-
itus over the Achilles tendon (the most common site is ≈5cm from its
insertion). The calf squeeze (Simmonds) test is normal. Check lipid proﬁle.
Treat with analgesia, NSAID, and a brief period of rest (eg 1–2 days) before
gradually returning to normal activities as guided by symptoms. Occasionally,
1–2 weeks in a BKWPOP may be useful. A heel pad inserted into footwear
may help. Athletes may beneﬁt from removal of heel tabs from training shoes
if implicated. Avoid local steroid injection, which may irisk of tendon rupture
by impeding healing or by allowing premature resumption of activity.
Calf/leg pain with no history of trauma
A variety of conditions may be implicated, including:
• Shin splints: a variety of pathophysiological processes have been sug-
  gested, including tibial periostitis. This condition is characterized by pain
  over the anterior distal tibial shaft after running on hard surfaces. Advise
  rest and NSAID.
• Stress fractures: can affect the tibia (as well as the ﬁbula—see b p.480).
  Treat with analgesia and POP with orthopaedic follow-up.
• Bursitis: inﬂammation of the bursae around the insertion of the Achilles
  tendon responds to conservative measures.
• DVT: see b p.118.
• Cellulitis: see b p.413.
• Ischaemia: see b p.531.
• Ruptured Baker’s cyst.
484    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Approach to ankle injuries
      Ankle injuries are among the most common problems presenting to the
      ED. Adopt a logical, consistent approach to identify which patients are
      likely to have a fracture and to avoid unnecessary X-rays in patients with
      uncomplicated sprains.
      History
      Establish the exact mechanism of injury. Most are inversion injuries
      (where the sole of the foot turns to face medially as the ankle is plantar
      ﬂexed) causing damage to structures around the lateral malleolus (most
      notably, the anterior taloﬁbular ligament). Eversion injuries occur less com-
      monly and damage the structures around the medial malleolus. Hyper-
      dorsiﬂexion and plantar ﬂexion injuries occur less frequently.
      The following are relevant in the initial assessment of ankle injuries:
      • A fracture is more likely in patients who are unable to weight bear
        (WB) immediately following the injury.
      • A ‘crack’ or ‘snap’ may be heard and is not indicative by itself of a
        fracture.
      • Ice, analgesia, and elevation may inﬂuence the appearance of an ankle
        injury.
      Examination
      Examine from the knee down for tenderness over:
      • Proximal ﬁbula.
      • Lateral malleolus and ligaments.
      • Medial malleolus and ligaments.
      • Navicular.
      • Calcaneum.
      • Achilles tendon.
      • Base of 5th metatarsal (MT).
      Is an X-ray required1?
      Follow the Ottawa ankle rules (Fig. 9.38) for adults and X-ray ankles if
      patients:
      • Were unable to WB for 4 steps both immediately after the injury and at
        the time of examination.
      • Have tenderness over the posterior surface of the distal 6cm (or tip) of
        the lateral or medial malleolus.
      Note that tenderness over the navicular, calcaneum, base of 5th MT or
      proximal ﬁbula require speciﬁc X-rays to exclude fractures.
      Adopt a lower threshold for X-ray in the very young, the elderly, and in
      patients who are difﬁcult to assess (eg intoxicated).

      1 Adapted from Stiell IG (1993) Decision rules for the use of radiography in acute ankle injuries.
        Reﬁnement and prospective validation. J Am Med Ass 269: 1127–32.
                                                     APPROACH TO ANKLE INJURIES                          485

Fig. 9.38 The Ottawa ankle rules.
Guidelines for X-ray in a simple ankle injury. Bony tenderness over the points indicated requires
an X-ray. X-ray is also required if the patient is unable to weight-bear immediately after the injury
or to walk 4 steps in the ED.
X-ray the ankle for malleolar tenderness and the foot for metatarsal/tarsal tenderness. If the patient
is not X-rayed then they are given instructions to return after 5 days if they have trouble weight-
bearing.
Adapted from Stiell IG (1993) Decision rules for the use of radiography in acute ankle injuries.
Reﬁnement and prospective validation. J Am Med Ass 269: 1127–32.
486    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Ankle fractures and dislocations
      Clinical assessment and imaging after ankle injury is outlined in b p.484.
      Ankle fractures
      Fractures around the ankle most commonly involve the malleoli—medial,
      lateral, and what is commonly referred to as the ‘posterior malleolus’
      (the posterior part of the distal tibia). The mortice joint formed by the
      talus and the distal tibia, ﬁbula, ligaments, and the distal tibio-ﬁbular
      syndesmosis allows very little rotation or angulation at the ankle joint.
      As a consequence, forced twisting or angulation of the ankle joint causes
      fractures associated with ligamentous injuries and in severe cases, disruption
      of the distal tibio-ﬁbular syndesmosis.
      Treatment depends upon a combination of clinical ﬁndings and X-ray
      appearances. Look carefully for talar shift.
      • Small avulsion fractures essentially reﬂect ligament/joint capsule damage.
         Treat with rest, elevation, analgesia, and early mobilization as for sprains.
      • Larger avulsion fractures may require initial immobilization in BKPOP
         with crutches and orthopaedic follow-up.
      • Undisplaced, isolated medial or lateral malleolar fractures are usually
         stable and do well with conservative measures. Provide analgesia,
         crutches, and immobilize in a well-padded BKPOP cast. Advise limb
         elevation and arrange orthopaedic follow-up. Note that an isolated
         ‘high’ lateral malleolus fracture may only be apparent on the lateral
         X-ray and may be associated with deltoid (medial) ligament injury with
         instability—some require ORIF.
      • Displaced fractures of the medial or lateral malleolus require ORIF. Give
         analgesia and, as appropriate, IV sedation to allow reduction of talar shift.
         Immobilize the limb in a BKPOP slab and refer to the orthopaedic team.
      • Bimalleolar or trimalleolar fractures are unstable. Having attempted to
         reduce any signiﬁcant talar shift (with appropriate sedation), place in a
         BKPOP, obtain fresh X-rays, and refer to the orthopaedic team.
      Ankle dislocation
      Dislocation of the ankle is an orthopaedic emergency. Treat promptly
      on diagnosis. Examination shows gross deformity of the ankle, severe
      stretching of the skin (resulting in fracture blisters, skin necrosis, or
      even converting the injury to a compound fracture), and often deﬁcits in
      peripheral pulses or sensation. The ankle can dislocate in the absence of
      associated fractures, but this is uncommon.
      Treatment Prompt closed reduction and immobilization in POP usually
      has to precede X-ray (unless available immediately). ‘Prompt treatment’
      does not justify reduction without considering analgesia or sedation.
      • Give Entonox®, IV analgesia, or sedation as appropriate with full
         precautions.
      • Warn the patient there may be a brief i in discomfort as the ankle
         reduces.
      • With the knee ﬂexed and supported, gently grasp the heel with one
         hand and support the patient’s calf with the other.
      • Pull smoothly on the heel—it may be necessary to slightly exag-
         gerate the deformity in order to obtain reduction. Success is indicated
         by return of normal ankle contours, relief of skin tension, and often
         dramatic relief of pain.
      • Once reduced, re-check pulses and sensation, immobilize in a POP slab,
         and arrange check X-rays.
      • Refer the patient to the orthopaedic team immediately.
                                                         ANKLE SPRAINS         487

Ankle sprains
Clinical assessment and imaging after ankle injury is outlined in b p.484.
The structures most frequently injured in inversion injuries are the lateral
joint capsule and the anterior taloﬁbular ligament. Increasing injury causes
additional damage to the calcaneoﬁbular ligament and posterior taloﬁbular
ligament.
Treatment
Historically, treatment of sprained ankles has been based upon ‘RICE’
(rest, ice, compression, elevation), but the scientiﬁc basis for all the
elements of this is distinctly lacking!
Advise initial rest, elevating the ankle above hip level, and to consider
applying ice intermittently during the ﬁrst 2 days for periods of 10–15min.
Begin to WB as soon as symptoms allow, but elevate at all other times.
An elastic support from toes to knee is traditional, but of no proven value
(and may be harmful by ipain without speeding recovery). If used, ensure
that it is not worn in bed. Advise the patient to gently exercise the ankle
in all directions and to use simple analgesia regularly until symptoms
improve. Most patients with minor sprains can expect full recovery in
≈4weeks. It may be possible to resume sports gradually within 2weeks,
depending on progress.
The inability to WB implies more severe injury. Provide crutches to those
completely unable to WB despite analgesia, with advice to elevate the
ankle. Arrange review at 2–4days—if still unable to WB, consider
10days’ immobilization in a below-knee cast, with subsequent outpatient
follow-up. Other approaches include the use of adhesive strapping or pre-
formed ankle braces. These may be useful in selected cases. Patients can
usually expect good functional recovery and should not regard the ankle
as ‘weak’. Long-term problems (eg weakness/instability whilst walking
over rough ground) are often related to dankle proprioception following
immobilization, so aim to mobilize as soon as possible.
Long-term complications
Do not regard ankle sprains simply as trivial injuries: patients may suffer
long-term morbidity (which often causes them to return to the ED):
• Instability often manifests itself by recurrent ankle sprains. Refer to
  physiotherapy (to include isometric exercises).
• Peroneal tendon subluxation reﬂects a torn peroneal retinaculum,
  allowing the peroneal tendons to slip anteriorly. The clinical presenta-
  tion includes clicking and a sensation of something slipping. Movement
  of the foot/ankle (especially eversion) reproduces the subluxation.
  Refer for orthopaedic follow-up—surgery is an option.
• Peroneal nerve injury is relatively common, but not frequently sought
  for. Neurapraxia results from stretching of branches of the peroneal
  nerve at the time of injury, with subsequent d sensation over part of the
  dorsum of the foot and d proprioception at the ankle joint (reﬂecting
  injury to the articular branches).
488    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Foot fractures and dislocations
      Crushing or other violent injuries to the foot can result in signiﬁcant
      long-term disability. Multiple fractures or dislocation of the tarsals
      or MTs are often overlooked in the presence of other severe injuries.
      Delayed or inadequate treatment result in high rates of post-traumatic
      OA. Compartment syndromes (b p.398) or vascular injuries may occur.
      Amputations or severe mangling injuries of the foot are rarely suitable for
      reconstruction/re-implantation due to poor long-term functional results.
      Talar injuries
      Falls onto the feet or violent dorsiﬂexion of the ankle (eg against car
      pedals in a crash) can result in fractures to the anterior body or articular
      dome of the talus. Displaced fractures and dislocations frequently result in
      avascular necrosis.
      Treat with analgesia, immobilization in a backslab POP, and refer promptly
      for orthopaedic treatment (may require MUA and/or ORIF). Dislocations
      of the talus require prompt reduction under GA.
      Upper/midfoot dislocations
      These injuries follow violent twisting, inverting or everting injuries of the
      foot. Peritalar/subtalar dislocations involve the articulation between the
      talus and the calcaneum. Give adequate analgesia and refer to ortho-
      paedics for prompt reduction under GA. Mid-tarsal dislocations involve
      the mid-tarsal joint (comprising the calcaneum and talus posteriorly and
      the navicular and cuboid anteriorly) and are treated similarly. Isolated
      dislocation of the talus is rare and requires prompt reduction under GA.
      Calcaneal fracture
      Calcaneal fractures most often follow a fall from height directly onto the
      heels. Always exclude associated injuries of the cervical and lumbar spine,
      pelvis, hips, or knees. Examine for swelling, bruising, and tenderness over
      the calcaneum, particularly over the sides. Examine both calcanei for com-
      parison, remembering that fractures are commonly bilateral. Examine the
      Achilles tendon for injury (b p.482). Request speciﬁc calcaneal X-rays and
      scrutinize carefully breaks in the cortices, trabeculae or subtle signs of com-
      pression (reduction in Bohler’s angle—see Fig. 9.39). Refer all fractures to
      orthopaedic staff. The majority will require admission for elevation, analgesia
      and in selected cases, ORIF following CT scanning.

                                       Tibia

                                      Talus
                                                               35°–40°

                                        Calcaneum

      Fig. 9.39 Bohler’s angle (normally 35–45°).
                               FOOT FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS                   489

Clinically suspected calcaneal fracture, but X-rays normal
Sometimes, clinical suspicion of a calcaneal fracture is not conﬁrmed by
X-rays at the time of initial presentation. It is possible that X-rays may
initially fail to identify a calcaneal fracture. Therefore, treat clinically
with analgesia, rest, elevation, crutches and arrange review at 7–10days,
when consideration can be given to further imaging if symptoms persist
(eg more X-rays and/or CT scan).
Metatarsal fractures and dislocations
Multiple MT fractures may follow heavy objects falling onto the feet or
more commonly, after being run over by a vehicle tyre or wheel. In all
such cases, consider the possibility of tarso-metatarsal (Lisfranc) dislo-
cation. This can be easily missed on standard foot X-rays, which do not
usually include a true lateral view—look to check that the medial side
of the second MT is correctly aligned with the medial side of the middle
cuneiform. Check for presence of the dorsalis pedis pulse. Multiple, dis-
placed, or dislocated MT fractures require urgent orthopaedic treatment.
Support in a POP backslab following analgesia and refer for MUA, K-wire
ﬁxation, or occasionally, ORIF. MT stress fractures are discussed below.
Isolated avulsion fractures of the 5th MT base
These follow inversion injuries of the ankle, the base of the 5th MT being
avulsed by the tendon of peroneus brevis. Always examine this area in
ankle injuries and request foot X-rays if tender. Do not mistake accessory
bones or the epiphysis (which runs parallel, not transverse to the 5th
MT base). Treat with analgesia, elevation, and support in a padded crepe
bandage or temporarily, in a BKPOP if symptoms are severe. Arrange
orthopaedic follow-up.
Jones fracture (of the 5th MT)
This is a transverse fracture of the 5th MT just distal to the intermetatarsal
joint. It is a signiﬁcant fracture as it is prone to non-union. Treat with
analgesia, crutches, BKPOP, and orthopaedic follow-up.
Stress fractures of the MTs
Fatigue fractures of the MTs are common. They typically follow prolonged
or unusual exercise (hence the term ‘march fracture’), but often occur
without an obvious cause. The commonest site is the 2nd MT shaft, but
the 3rd MT or rarely the navicular or other MTs may be affected. Examine
for swelling over the forefoot (there may be none) and localized tender-
ness over the MT shaft or on longitudinal compression of the MT shaft
(do this by pressing on the MT head below the toe—pain will be felt along
the MT shaft). X-rays are usually normal initially. Callus or periosteal reac-
tion seen at ≈2–3weeks on X-ray will conﬁrm the diagnosis, but this is not
required for treatment.
Treat symptomatically with analgesia, elevation, rest, and modiﬁed daily
activity as required. A padded insole may help. Firm shoes or boots
may be more comfortable than ﬂexible trainers. Expect full recovery in
6–8 weeks. If unable to WB, consider a brief period in a BKPOP (or
‘Aircast’ boot) until symptoms improve.
490    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Toe injuries
      Most toe injuries do not require X-ray
      The treatment of isolated closed fractures of the toe phalanges without
      clinical deformity or other complicating factors is not altered by X-rays.
      X-ray the following:
      • Obvious deformity, gross swelling or suspected dislocation.
      • Suspected compound injuries.
      • If any tenderness over the MT head or MTPJ.
      • Suspected FB.
      Toe fractures
      Treat uncomplicated phalangeal fractures with simple analgesia, elevation,
      and support with padded buddy strapping. Advise the patient to resume
      normal activities as soon as possible, but explain that some discomfort
      may be present for up to 4–6weeks. Hospital follow-up is not normally
      required. Manipulate displaced fractures under LA digital block (as des-
      cribed for ﬁngers on b p.294). Angulated toe phalangeal fractures can be
      difﬁcult to manipulate—a useful trick is to use a pen (or needle holder)
      placed between the toes as a fulcrum. Once satisfactorily reduced, buddy
      strap and conﬁrm the position with X-rays.
      Dislocated toes
      Untreated, toe dislocations may cause troublesome, persistent symptoms.
      Reduce promptly under LA digital block and splint by buddy strapping.
      Always conﬁrm reduction by X-ray, and discharge with analgesia and
      advice on elevation and gradual mobilization.
      Compound toe injuries
      Careful wound toilet, debridement, and repair is essential to ensure rapid
      healing and avoid infective complications. Ensure that there is adequate
      tetanus prophylaxis. Always clean wounds thoroughly under adequate
      anaesthesia (usually LA digital block), provide antibiotics and analgesia.
      Advise the patient to elevate the injured foot and arrange follow-up
      according to local practice. More severe injuries will require exploration
      and repair under GA. Refer these cases to the orthopaedic team.
      Mangled or amputated toes
      Functional results of attempted re-implantation of amputated toes or
      repair of badly mangled toes are often poor. Provide analgesia and refer
      to the orthopaedic surgeon for wound management and amputation of
      unsalvageable toes.
                                          SOFT TISSUE FOOT PROBLEMS              491

Soft tissue foot problems
Puncture wounds to the foot
• ‘Simple’ puncture wounds: see b p.419.
• Weever ﬁsh injuries: see b p.416.
FBs embedded in the foot
Searching for small FBs in the sole of the foot has been likened to search-
ing for a needle in a haystack. Follow the principles set out in b Further
assessment of skin wounds, p.428. Nerve blocks (b p.306) can be useful
to allow exploration of foot wounds.
Morton’s metatarsalgia
A burning discomfort radiating to the toes may result from an interdigital
nerve neuroma at the level of the MT heads. The nerve between the 2nd
and 3rd MT heads is frequently affected. There is localized tenderness,
which is also reproduced on compression of MT heads together. Advise
simple analgesia and GP follow-up to consider referral to a foot surgeon.
Plantar fasciitis
Plantar fasciitis can occur spontaneously or as a chronic overuse injury.
Inﬂammation develops in the plantar fascia, typically at its calcaneal
insertion. This results in gradually increasing, burning pain in the sole of
the foot and heel, which is worse on WB. Examine for localized tender-
ness over the calcaneal insertion of the plantar fascia and heel pad. X-ray
may reveal a calcaneal spur, but this is not a useful diagnostic feature.
Advise NSAID, rest and elevation for 1–2 days, with GP follow-up. A padded
shoe insole or sorbothane heel pad may help. Severe, persistent cases are
occasionally treated with local steroid injection or even surgical division of
the plantar fascia.
Osteochondritis dissecans (b p.708)
Osteochondritis of a MT head (usually the 2nd—Freiberg’s disease) causes
gradual onset pain on WB. The cause is often unclear, but it may follow
minor injury. Examination may reveal local tenderness but little else. X-ray
for evidence of ﬂattening, widening, or fragmentation of the MT head or
narrowing of the MTPJ.
Treat initially with simple analgesia. Refer persistent cases to orthopaedics
to consider excision of the MT head or osteotomy.
In-growing toenails
Refer back to the GP for elective treatment, unless there is evidence
of infection. In this case, consider oral antibiotics (eg ﬂucloxacillin or
co-amoxiclav), or if there is an acute paronychia, incision, and drainage
under LA. On occasion, it may be appropriate to excise a wedge of nail
under LA.
492    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Low back pain
      Low back pain is the commonest cause of lost work days in the UK. The
      initial ED approach is to identify any patients who may have immediately life-
      threatening problems (eg leaking aortic aneurysm) and sort the rest into:
      • Simple (‘mechanical’) back pain: no investigations or referral required.
      • Nerve root pain: referral and investigation needed if symptoms persistent
         or progressive.
      • Possible serious spinal pathology: referral and investigation required.
      • Suspected cord compression: immediate neurosurgical/orthopaedic
         referral mandatory.
      Psychogenic back pain is not an ED diagnosis. If in doubt, refer.
      History
      General Document patient’s age, sex and employment. Note onset
      and duration of symptoms, character, position and radiation of pain,
      exacerbating or relieving factors. Precipitants include injuries, falls, heavy
      lifting, or unaccustomed activity.
      Past history Detail any previous back problems or surgery, other medical
      conditions (eg rheumatoid arthritis, OA, osteoporosis).
      Drug history Is the patient using analgesia (and has it helped?). Ask about
      corticosteroids and contraindications to NSAIDs.
      Social history Ask about home circumstances, work, and stress.
      Systemic enquiry Weakness, altered sensation, weight loss, anorexia,
      fever, rigors, cough, sputum, haemoptysis, bowel, or urinary symptoms.
      Examination
      ‘Unwell’ patient Immediately assess airway, breathing, and circulation.
      Look for shock and a pulsatile abdominal mass, peritonism, evidence of
      blood loss, radial-femoral pulse discrepancies or asymmetry.
      ‘Well’ patient Look for signs of weight loss, cachexia, anaemia, clubbing,
      or muscle wasting. Inspect the back for muscle spasm, scars, scoliosis, or
      other deformity. If possible, watch the patient walk, looking for spasm,
      abnormal posture or limping. Palpate for tenderness over the spine, lower
      ribs and renal angles. With the patient supine on a trolley, look for muscle
      wasting in the legs. Examining both sides:
      • Straight leg raise: note the angle which reproduces pain (lumbar nerve
         root irritation).
      • Crossed straight leg raise: nerve root symptoms reproduced by lifting
         contralateral leg strongly suggests lumbar disc prolapse and nerve root
         entrapment.
      Perform a neurological examination Check tone, power, sensation, and
      reﬂexes in the lower limbs:
      • L4 covers sensation of medial lower leg; quadriceps power; knee jerk.
      • L5 covers sensation of lateral lower leg and great toe; extensor hallucis
         longus power; hamstrings jerk.
      • S1 covers sensation of little toe and lateral foot; foot plantar ﬂexors
         power; ankle jerk. Always check perineal and perianal sensation.
      Perform a rectal examination for anal tone, masses, or blood. Examine the
      abdomen for masses. Document peripheral pulses and perfusion.
                                                        LOW BACK PAIN          493

Investigation
Check T° and urinalysis. X-ray is indicated for some patients aged
>55years, or those who are systemically unwell, with a history of trauma
(except clinical coccyx fracture), or where malignancy, infection, or HIV is
suspected. In the latter cases, also check C-reactive protein (CRP), FBC,
U&E.
Treatment
Refer urgently patients with lower limb weakness, altered perineal or
perianal sensation, sphincter disturbance (this is strongly suggestive of
cauda equina syndrome due to central lumbar disc prolapse). An MRI scan
will conﬁrm this diagnosis—in which case, urgent consultation with a
neurosurgeon will allow emergency surgical decompression to be planned
as appropriate.
Refer patients with the following: aged <20 or >55years, unremitting or
increasing symptoms, widespread neurological signs, weight loss, systemic
illness, pyrexia, chronic corticosteroids, osteoporosis, or HIV +ve patients
with thoracic pain.
Treat simple ‘mechanical’ back pain with regular simple analgesia and/or
NSAID. Avoid the routine use of opioids. Small doses of benzodiazepines
(eg diazepam 2–5mg tds) may be useful, but tend to cause drowsiness.
Advise the patient to aim to return to normal activity, even if some
discomfort persists. Avoid bed rest. Expect recovery in 4–6weeks. Nerve
root symptoms mostly resolve over weeks to months with the above
treatment, physiotherapy or manipulation. In all cases, give written and
verbal advice for immediate return if limb weakness, numbness, bladder,
or bowel problems occur. Advise follow-up with the GP.
494    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Acute arthritis 1
      Approach
      Whenever a patient presents with a painful joint, try to distinguish
      whether the source of pain is articular or peri-articular. Painful joints of
      articular origin produce warmth, tenderness, and swelling about the entire
      joint, with painful movement in all directions. Pain of peri-articular origin
      (outside joint capsule), such as bursitis/tendinitis tends to result in tender-
      ness and swelling localized to a small area, with pain on passive movement
      only felt in limited planes.
      Consider a septic cause in every patient who presents with acute arthritis.
      Useful investigations include white blood cells (WBC), erythrocyte
      sedimentation rate (ESR), or CRP, and joint aspiration.
      Joint aspiration
      The most important diagnostic test in patients presenting with acute
      arthritis is examination of the synovial ﬂuid. When joint aspiration is per-
      formed, ensure that an aseptic technique is employed. Avoid joint aspira-
      tion through an area of cellulitis. Send ﬂuid for Gram stain, culture, crystal
      examination, and cell count (Table 9.4). Remember that the absence of
      bacteria on Gram staining does not exclude septic arthritis.

       Table 9.4
                         Normal                   Reactive        Infectious

       Colour            Colourless/pale yellow   Yellow          Yellow
       Turbidity         Clear, slightly turbid   Turbid          Turbid, purulent
       Cell count/mm     200–1000                 3000–10,000     >10,000
       Predominant cell Mononuclear               Neutrophil      Neutrophil
       type
       Gram stain        None                     None            +ve
       Culture           –ve                      –ve             +ve

      Causes of polyarthritis
      • Rheumatoid arthritis.
      • Ankylosing spondylitis.
      • Reiter’s disease.
      • Psoriatic arthritis.
      • Arthritis associated with inﬂammatory bowel disease.
      • Viral arthritis.
      • Rheumatic fever.
      • Gonococcal arthritis.
      • Gout.
                                                     ACUTE ARTHRITIS 1          495

Septic arthritis
Pyogenic infection usually reaches a joint via the bloodstream, but may
also develop from adjacent osteomyelitis or external skin puncture
wounds. Sepsis may progress to complete joint destruction within 24hr.
Infective agents Staph aureus, Gonococcus, Strep, TB, Salmonella. Haemophilus
was the commonest organism in babies before Haemophilus immunization,
but is now rare. There is an i incidence in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis, those taking steroids, the immunosuppressed and at the extremes
of age. Do not overlook septic arthritis superimposed on a non-infectious
joint (eg gout, rheumatoid joints).
Presentation Typically only 1 joint is affected and is red, painful, and
swollen. No movement is usually tolerated (but steroids and analgesics
can mask many of the common features of septic arthritis). The joint is
held in position of most comfort, usually slight ﬂexion. There may be
fever, shaking, and rigors. Note that hip joint infection may not produce
obvious external ﬁndings due to its deep location. Do not overlook a
septic joint with signs obscured by concomitant antibiotic use. IV drug
abusers may have involvement of uncommon joints of the axial skeleton
(eg sacroiliac, vertebral, and sterno-clavicular joints).
Investigation FBC, ESR, or CRP, blood cultures, joint aspiration (see Table
9.4). X-rays may be initially normal or show only soft tissue swelling with
displacement of capsular fat planes. Later, features of bone destruction
occur.
Treatment Commence IV antibiotics (eg ﬂucloxacillin + benzylpenicillin).
Refer urgently to the orthopaedic team for joint irrigation/drainage,
analgesia, splintage of the joint.
Note: Prosthetic joint infection can be difﬁcult to detect, but pain is
typically constant and present at rest. Early infection (within 3 months
of surgery) may cause obvious wound inﬂammation. This is less likely to
be apparent in delayed or later infections. There may be little in the way
of systemic symptoms. Suggestive radiological features include widening
and lucency of the bone-cement interface by >2mm, movement of the
prosthesis, periosteal reaction and fractures through the cement, although
X-rays may be normal. Adopt a low threshold for suspecting prosthetic
joint infections and referral to the orthopaedic team.
Traumatic arthritis
Joint pain, tenderness, drange of movement and haemarthrosis after
injury implies intra-articular fracture. Note, however, that septic arthritis
may occur in association with trauma, even in the absence of penetrating
injury.
Osteoarthritis
Elderly patients with known OA may suffer acute ‘ﬂare ups’. Constitutional
symptoms are not a feature. X-rays may show asymmetrical joint space
narrowing, osteophytes and subchondral cyst formation. Advise NSAID
and/or paracetamol, plus graduated exercises.
496    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Acute arthritis 2
      Acute gout
      Most often affects 1st MTPJ or knee. Precipitated by trauma, diet, diuretics,
      renal failure, myeloproliferative disease and cytotoxics. Ask about previous
      renal stones. Look for tophi. Joint aspiration reveals negatively birefringent
      crystals. Septic arthritis can occur with gout—ensure aspirates are Gram
      stained and cultured. X-rays initially show soft tissue swelling, later punched
      out lesions in peri-articular bone. Serum uric acid may be i, but can be
      normal in an attack. Treat with rest and NSAID (eg diclofenac 75mg bd)
      or if NSAID is contra-indicated, consider colchicine (500mcg bd initially,
      slowly i to qds as needed to control symptoms, preferably with GP review).
      Do not alter treatment of patients already on long-term gout therapy.
      Note: oral steroids (eg prednisolone 30mg od for 5 days) may help patients
      who are unable to tolerate NSAIDs or who are resistant to other treatments.
      Acute pseudogout
      Typically affects the knees, wrists, or hips of an elderly person with history
      of arthritic attacks precipitated by illness, surgery, or trauma. Associated
      with: hyperparathyroidism, haemochromatosis, Wilson’s disease, hypothy-
      roidism, diabetes, hypophosphatemia. X-ray shows calciﬁcation in joint,
      menisci, tendon insertions, ligaments, bursae. Aspiration reveals weakly
      +ve birefringent crystals on polarizing microscopy. Treat symptomatically
      (with NSAID) and refer.
      Rheumatoid arthritis
      Presentation Persistent symmetrical deforming peripheral arthropathy
      typically starts with swollen, painful, stiff hands and feet, which gradually
      get worse, with larger joints becoming involved. Other modes of presen-
      tation are: persistent or relapsing monoarthritis of different large joints,
      systemic illness with minimal joint problems, sudden onset widespread
      arthritis, vague limb girdle aches.
      Hand signs include MCPJ and PIPJ swelling, ulnar deviation and volar
      subluxation at MCPJs, boutonnière, and ‘swan-neck’ ﬁnger deformities.
      Extensor tendon rupture may occur.
      Neck problems Degeneration of the transverse ligament of the dens
      carries the risk of subluxation and cord damage.
      Extra-articular features SC nodules, vasculitis, pulmonary ﬁbrosis,
      splenomegaly, anaemia, pleurisy, pericarditis, scleritis, kerato-conjunctivitis.
      Rhematoid factor is +ve in 70% of cases.
      X-rays show soft tissue swelling, peri-articular osteoporosis, joint space
      narrowing, bony erosions/subluxation.
      Treatment Refer patients who are systemically unwell. Others may
      beneﬁt from NSAID, splintage, and rheumatology clinic referral.
      Viral arthritis
      Rubella, hepatitis B, mumps, Epstein–Barr virus, and enteroviruses may
      cause arthritis. In hepatitis B, arthritis usually affects PIPJ, MCPJ or knee
      and precedes the onset of jaundice. Rubella is associated with an acute
      symmetrical arthritis and tenosynovitis.
                                                       ACUTE ARTHRITIS 2           497

Rheumatic fever (see b p.672)
This is a non-infectious immune disease which follows infection with
Group A β-haemolytic streptococci. Typically, a migratory or additive
symmetrical polyarthritis affects the knees, ankles, elbows, and wrists.
Diagnosis is based on revised Jones criteria: evidence of previous
streptococcal infection (ie recent scarlet fever, +ve throat swab, or anti-
streptolysin titre >200U/mL) plus 2 major or 1 major plus 2 minor criteria.
Major criteria: carditis (pericarditis, myocarditis or endocarditis), migratory
polyarthritis, chorea, SC nodules, rash (erythema marginatum).
Minor criteria: iESR/CRP, arthralgia, fever, history of previous rheumatic
fever (or rheumatic heart disease), iPR interval on ECG.
Investigations: Throat swab, ESR, CRP, and anti-streptolysin titre.
Treatment Refer for admission, rest, aspirin, benzyl penicillin, and splintage.
Sero-negative spondyloarthropathies
These have the following common features: involvement of the spine and
sacroiliac joints, inﬂammation then calciﬁcation of bony tendon insertions,
peripheral inﬂammatory arthropathy, and extra-articular manifestations
such as uveitis, aortic regurgitation, and pulmonary ﬁbrosis.
Ankylosing spondylitis
Usually presents with chronic low back pain in men aged 15–30 years.
Progressive spinal fusion ultimately results in a ﬁxed kyphotic spine
(which is particularly prone to fracture after injury), hyperﬂexed neck,
and restricted respiration. Hips, shoulders, and knees may be involved.
Other features are: iritis, apical lung ﬁbrosis, plantar fasciitis, and Achilles
tendonitis. There may be normochromic anaemia and iESR. X-rays
show ‘bamboo spine’ (squared vertebrae), eroded apophyseal joints and
obliterated sacro-iliac joints.
Reiter’s syndrome
Triad of urethritis, conjunctivitis and sero-negative arthritis may follow
infection (urethritis, cervicitis, or dysentery). May cause large joint
monoarthritis of a WB leg joint. Other features: iritis, keratoderma
blenorrhagicum, circinate balanitis, plantar fasciitis, Achilles tendonitis,
aortic incompetence.
Joint aspirate yields inﬂammatory cells, with –ve culture. WCC and ESR
are i.
Psoriatic arthritis
Arthritis rarely precedes skin involvement.
Enteropathic arthropathies
Inﬂammatory bowel disease is associated with spondyloarthritis and large
joint mono-arthropathy. There may also be a migratory polyarthritis.
Gonococcal arthritis
May present with fever, migratory tenosynovitis and polyarthralgia,
arthritis (knee, ankle or wrist) and skin rash. Genital infection may be
silent, especially in women. Take swabs with special culture media and
refer for investigation.
498    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Eponymous fractures
      Correctly applied, the one or two words that comprise an eponymous injury
      convey succinctly an otherwise involved description of a complex fracture.
      Aviator’s astragalus
      Fractures of the neck of the talus, previously commonly observed amongst
      World War II pilots who crash-landed their damaged planes on returning
      from bombing raids. The injuries resulted from the upward thrust of the
      rudder bar, causing dorsiﬂexion forcing the talus against the anterior tibia.
      Bankart lesion
      Avulsion of the joint capsule and glenoid labrum resulting from anterior
      dislocation of the shoulder joint. It is implicated as a causative factor for
      recurrent dislocations.
      Barton’s fracture
      First described by Barton in 1839, this complex distal radial fracture is
      intra-articular. Displacement of the distal radial fragment allows subluxa-
      tion of the carpal bones. A rare variety is called a Lentenneur’s fracture.
      Bennett’s fracture dislocation
      These intra-articular fractures of the base of the ﬁrst MC are notorious
      for allowing the main MC fragment to slip into a poor position. If conserv-
      ative treatment (POP) is preferred to internal ﬁxation, careful follow-up
      will be needed to ensure a satisfactory outcome.
      Boutonnière deformity
      Rupture of the central slip of the extensor tendon at the PIPJ allows the
      base of the middle phalanx to ‘button-hole’ through. The remaining two
      parts of the extensor expansion slip along the side of the ﬁnger and act
      as ﬂexors at the PIPJ, whilst still extending the DIPJ. This produces the
      characteristic deformity.
      Boxer’s fracture
      Fracture of the neck of the little ﬁnger MC rarely occurs during formal
      boxing when gloves are worn. It is much more commonly seen following
      impromptu street or bar-room brawls: innocuous-looking overlying
      wounds are often compound human (‘reverse ﬁght’) bites (b Speciﬁc
      bites and stings, p.416).
      Bumper fracture
      The height of the average car bumper renders the adult pedestrian (who
      is unfortunate enough to be knocked down) particularly vulnerable to a
      fracture through the lateral tibial condyle into the tibial plateau. There is
      often an associated tear to the medial collateral knee ligament.
      Chance fracture
      A horizontal fracture through a vertebral body, associated arch, and
      spinous process may result from an injury involving distraction and ﬂexion.
      It typically involves the lumbar spine of car passengers restrained only by a
      lap belt in a road trafﬁc collision.
                                                EPONYMOUS FRACTURES               499

Clay-shoveller’s fracture
Resistance against neck ﬂexion may produce an avulsion of the tip of a
spinous process of the lower cervical or upper thoracic spine. The lesion
typically affects C7.
Colles’ fracture
Abraham Colles, Professor of Surgery in Dublin, described this common
distal radial fracture in 1814. The classic dinner fork deformity results from
posterior displacement and angulation of the distal fragment (b p.444).
Dashboard dislocation
A high speed head-on road trafﬁc collision causing the dashboard to
impact upon the ﬂexed knee often results in posterior dislocation of the
hip.
Dupuytren’s fracture-dislocation
A highly unstable ankle injury in which there is a fracture of the distal
ﬁbula shaft, disruption of the medial ankle ligament and posterior tibio-
ﬁbular ligament. The result is gross diastasis and dislocation of the talus
laterally.
Essex–Lopresti fracture-dislocation
A heavy fall on the outstretched hand may cause a comminuted fracture of
the radial head. It is associated with tearing of the interosseous membrane
(diastasis), allowing subluxation of the distal ulna.
Galeazzi fracture-dislocation
Describes the combination of a fracture of the distal radial shaft with dis-
location of the distal radio-ulnar joint (b Forearm fractures and related
injury, p.448). A Moore’s fracture dislocation is a similar injury, except that
the radial fracture involves the distal radius, not the shaft.
Gamekeeper’s thumb
Rupture of the ulnar collateral ligament of the 1st MCPJ was originally
described as an occupational injury amongst gamekeepers, sustained whilst
breaking the necks of wounded rabbits. It is now most commonly seen as
a result of skiing injuries, particularly on artiﬁcial slopes, when the thumb
is caught in the diamond latticework matting. The injury requires prompt
diagnosis and treatment in order to avoid the long-term complication of
a weak pinch-grip.
Hangman’s fracture
Although no longer a part of modern life in the UK, executions were pre-
viously achieved by hanging. The victim was allowed to fall several feet
before being arrested by a noose. This produced rapid death from sever-
ance of the cervical spinal cord. The mechanism of injury is a combina-
tion of distraction and extension, causing an unstable (hangman’s) fracture
of the pedicles of the axis (C2), and disrupting the intervertebral disc
between C2 and C3. The fracture may also result from extension and
axial compression and may occur without neurological damage.
500    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Hill–Sachs lesion
      This is an impacted compression fracture of the humeral head, which
      occurs during anterior shoulder dislocation. It is produced by the recoil
      impaction of the humeral head against the rim of the glenoid as the former
      dislocates. It is believed by some to be an important causative factor for
      recurrent dislocation.
      Horse rider’s knee
      Frontal impact at the level of the proximal tibio-ﬁbular joint may result in pos-
      terior dislocation of the ﬁbular head. Reduction usually requires an MUA.
      Hume fracture-dislocation
      This refers to the combination of an olecranon fracture with dislocation
      of the radial head.
      Hutchinson fracture
      Also referred to as a ‘chauffeur’ fracture, this is the name sometimes given
      to a fracture of the radial styloid. It is classically caused by forced radial
      deviation of the wrist when the starting handle of an old-fashioned motor
      car ‘kicks back’.
      Ice skater’s fracture
      Children aged 2–8years are susceptible to stress fractures of the distal
      ﬁbula.
      Jefferson fracture
      An unstable ‘blowout’ fracture of C1 follows an axial load. One third are
      associated with a C2 fracture.
      Jones fracture
      This is a transverse fracture of the base of the 5th MT just distal to
      the intermetatarsal joint. It is a more signiﬁcant injury than an avulsion
      fracture at the insertion of peroneus brevis, as it is prone to non-union
      (b Foot fractures and dislocations, p.489).
      Le Fort facial fractures
      Experiments by Le Fort in 1901 were followed by descriptions of facial
      fractures and classiﬁcation into three anatomical types (b Middle third
      facial fractures, p.372), including the Guérin fracture (Le Fort I).
      Lisfranc fracture-dislocation
      Fracture dislocation at the tarso-metatarsal joint is a signiﬁcant injury. It is
      named after the surgeon who described the surgical operation of partial
      amputation of the foot at the level of the tarso-metatarsal joint.
      Luxatio erecta
      First described in 1859, this is an uncommon shoulder dislocation (inferior
      glenohumeral dislocation). The term is derived from Latin and describes
      the erect hyperabducted position of the arm after dislocation. The injury
      follows a hyperabduction force, most often after a fall. Axillary nerve
      damage occurs in 60%. Reduction of the dislocation may follow overhead
      traction or conversion to an anterior dislocation to which conventional
      techniques can be applied.
                                               EPONYMOUS FRACTURES              501

Maisonneuve injury
An unstable injury in which rupture of the medial ankle ligament is associ-
ated with a diastasis and proximal ﬁbula fracture.
Malgaigne’s fracture
An unstable injury in which the pelvic ring is disrupted in two places:
anteriorly (through both pubic rami) and posteriorly (sacroiliac joint
disruption, or fracture of ilium or sacrum).
Mallet injury
Stubbing a ﬁnger may rupture the extensor tendon (or avulse its phalan-
geal attachment) at the DIPJ, causing a ‘mallet deformity’, in which the DIPJ
is held ﬂexed. The mechanism of injury is forced ﬂexion of the extended
DIPJ.
March fracture
This refers to a stress fracture of the (usually 2nd) MT shaft after stren-
uous and unaccustomed exercise. Traditionally, it was observed after
heavy marching in new army recruits.
Monteggia fracture-dislocation
Fracture of the proximal ulna shaft is associated with dislocation of the
radial head. The latter is relatively easy to miss. Never accept an ulna
fracture as an isolated injury without obtaining complete views of both
forearm bones, including the elbow and wrist joints.
Nursemaid’s elbow
Alternative name for a ‘pulled elbow’ in a pre-school child (b p.724).
Nutcracker fracture
Lateral force applied to the forefoot may cause the cuboid to be fractured
as it is compressed between the calcaneum and the base of the 4th and
5th MTs.
O’Donahue’s triad
A torn medial meniscus, ruptured anterior cruciate ligament and ruptured
medial collateral ligament combine to produce a signiﬁcant knee injury.
Pelligrini–Stieda’s disease
Ossiﬁcation of the medial collateral knee ligament may follow avulsion of
the superﬁcial part from its attachment to the medial femoral condyle.
Pilon fracture
These intra-articular fractures of the distal tibia are uncommon, but may
also be subdivided into three types.
Pipkin fracture-dislocation
This refers to a posterior hip dislocation in which part of the femoral
head is avulsed by the ligamentum teres and remains attached to it
within the acetabulum. The avulsed fragment is rarely large enough to be
reattached.
502    CHAPTER 9 Wounds, fractures, orthopaedics

      Pott’s fracture
      This term has come to be applied indiscriminately to any ankle fracture,
      which may be simply subdivided into ‘uni-’, ‘bi-’, or ‘tri-malleolar’.
      Rolando fracture
      Essentially a comminuted Bennett’s fracture, the classic description is of
      Y shaped intra-articular fractures at the base of the 1st MC. Treatment
      is difﬁcult.
      Runner’s fracture
      Stress fractures of the tibia are particularly common amongst runners who
      chalk up many miles of running on roads each week.
      Smith’s fracture
      The so-called ‘reversed Colles’ fracture’ was ﬁrst described by Smith in
      1847.
      Straddle fracture
      Falls astride classically produce bilateral vertical pubic rami fractures.
      Tillaux fracture
      An avulsion fracture of the distal lateral tibia may occur due to the pull of
      the anterior tibio-ﬁbular ligament.
      Toddler’s fracture
      Undisplaced spiral fractures of the tibial shaft in children <7 years
      often follow minimal trauma and not be visible on initial X-ray.
      Subperiosteal bone formation is usually apparent radiologically by 2 weeks
      (see b Paediatric lower limb injuries, p.727).
 Chapter 10                                503

Surgery

Approach to abdominal pain           504
Causes of acute abdominal pain       506
Acute appendicitis                   507
Acute pancreatitis                   508
Biliary tract problems               510
Peptic ulcer disease                 511
Intestinal obstruction               512
Mesenteric ischaemia/infarction      514
Large bowel emergencies              516
Anorectal problems                   518
Retention of urine                   520
Testicular problems                  522
Penile problems and prostatitis      523
Ureteric colic                       524
Abscesses                            526
Cellulitis and erysipelas            528
Complications of varicose veins      529
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm   530
Acute limb ischaemia                 531
504    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Approach to abdominal pain
      First aim to identify patients requiring resuscitation or urgent treatment.
      The need for resuscitation is apparent in emergencies with associated
      hypovolaemic and/or septic shock. Less obvious, but equally important,
      is recognition of patients requiring urgent treatment with no clinical
      evidence of shock (especially ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm).
      History
      The pain Determine details of site, radiation, shift, character, timing,
      precipitating, and relieving factors.
      Vomiting Record anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. Ask about the nature
      of vomit (blood, bile, etc.). Vomiting that follows the onset of abdominal
      pain tends to imply a surgical cause, whereas vomiting preceding pain is
      often non-surgical.
      Bowel disturbance Enquire about recent change of bowel habit,
      particularly any rectal bleeding.
      Other symptoms Do not forget that abdominal pain may be due to
      urological, respiratory, cardiovascular or gynaecological disorders.
      Past history Determine the nature of previous surgery, preferably by
      obtaining old notes.
      Examination
      Vital signs Pulse, BP, respiratory rate, GCS, and T° may indicate the need
      for immediate intervention.
      Abdomen Note distension and scars from previous surgery. Check the
      hernial oriﬁces. Palpate gently for areas of tenderness. It is unnecessary
      and unkind to attempt to elicit rebound tenderness—tenderness on
      percussion is ample evidence of peritonitis. Perform PR/PV examination.
      General Look for evidence of dehydration and jaundice. Examine the
      respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
      Investigations
      Assessment of patients with abdominal pain in the ED usually depends
      upon history and examination rather than sophisticated tests. However,
      the following investigations may prove useful:
      • BMG: DKA may present with abdominal pain (b Hyperglycaemic
        crises, p.152).
      • Urinalysis: abdominal pain may result from urinary stones or infection.
        Perform a urine pregnancy test on all women of childbearing age.
      • Blood tests: consider the need for FBC, U&E, amylase, coagulation
        screen, and cross-matching. If clearly unwell, check ABG, and lactate.
        Although FBC is frequently requested in patients with abdominal pain,
        the awaited WCC rarely alters initial patient management.
      • ECG: especially in patients aged >55 years, who may be suffering from
        an atypical presentation of an acute medical problem, most notably
        acute myocardial infarction (MI).
                                     APPROACH TO ABDOMINAL PAIN                505

• Chest X-ray: a CXR is useful to exclude conditions above the diaphragm,
  which may mimic abdominal conditions (eg congestive heart failure,
  basal pneumonia).
• Abdominal X-ray: Speciﬁc indications for abdominal X-ray include
  suspicion of intestinal obstruction, toxic megacolon, sigmoid volvulus, GI
  perforation and urinary calculi (b Ureteric colic, p.524). X-rays are not
  indicated in patients with suspected uncomplicated appendicitis, UTI,
  ‘simple’ constipation, gastroenteritis, GI bleeding, acute pancreatitis.
  They are not ‘routinely indicated’ in the investigation of abdominal pain.
  In severely ill patients requiring imaging, CT or USS is usually more
  appropriate than plain abdominal X-rays.
• USS: reveals gallstones, free peritoneal ﬂuid, urinary stones and aortic
  aneurysms. It is increasingly used in the ED, but needs speciﬁc training.
• CT scan may have a role in assisting with the diagnosis of certain
  conditions (eg acute appendicitis).
Treatment
Prompt resuscitation and provision of analgesia are integral components
of the management of serious abdominal conditions. Ensure that patients
who are very sick and/or hypotensive receive early IV ﬂuids and full
monitoring (this includes measuring urinary output via a urinary catheter).
Follow the guidelines outlined in b Severe sepsis and shock for patients
with suspected sepsis, p.59.
The traditional belief that analgesia should not be given because it
might mask a serious diagnosis is incorrect and cruel. Diagnosis is often
easier when pain is relieved and the patient can give a better history and
co-operate with examination. The most appropriate form of analgesia is
usually IV opioid (eg morphine).
It can be difﬁcult to decide if admission is needed for a patient with
abdominal pain. Adopt a low threshold for seeking senior help. In general,
if doubt exists, refer to the surgeon, who may decide that it is prudent to
admit the patient for observation and investigation.
Pitfalls
• Steroids, NSAIDs, or obesity may render physical signs less obvious.
• B-blockade may mask signs of shock.
• Absence of fever does not exclude infection, especially in the very old,
  the very ill, and the immunosuppressed.
• When severe abdominal pain is out of all proportion to the physical
  ﬁndings, consider mesenteric infarction, aortic rupture/dissection, acute
  pancreatitis, torsion of ovarian cyst.
• Splenic rupture may occur after relatively trivial trauma in patients with
  glandular fever or haematological disorders.
• Consider gynaecological causes of abdominal pain in any woman of
  child-bearing age—always perform a pregnancy test.
• WCC may be normal in established peritonitis/sepsis.
• Amylase may be normal in acute pancreatitis. Conversely, moderate
  amylase i may occur in acute cholecystitis, perforated peptic ulcer, and
  mesenteric infarction.
506    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Causes of acute abdominal pain
      The cause of abdominal pain is often unclear initially. Indeed, many patients
      get better without any deﬁnite cause being identiﬁed (‘non-speciﬁc’
      abdominal pain). Remember also that a patient is much more likely to
      have a common condition (perhaps with an atypical presentation), rather
      than a very rare condition. Thus, a patient presenting with atypical abdom-
      inal pain is more likely to have acute appendicitis than tabes dorsalis, lead
      poisoning, or acute intermittent porphyria. The following conditions are
      seen relatively frequently:
      Surgical
      • Non-speciﬁc abdominal pain.
      • Acute appendicitis.
      • Cholecystitis and biliary colic.
      • Pancreatitis.
      • Peptic ulcer disease (including perforation).
      • Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm.
      • Mesenteric infarction.
      • Diverticulitis.
      • Large bowel perforation.
      • Intestinal obstruction from various causes.
      • Ureteric calculi.
      • Urinary retention.
      • Testicular torsion.
      • Intussusception.
      • Cancer (especially of the colon: see below).
      Gynaecological
      • Ectopic pregnancy.
      • Pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID).
      • Rupture/torsion of ovarian cyst.
      • Endometriosis.
      • Mittelschmertz.
      Medical
      • MI.
      • Pneumonia.
      • Pulmonary embolus (PE).
      • Aortic dissection.
      • Acute hepatitis.
      • DKA.
      • Urinary tract infection (UTI).
      • Herpes zoster.
      • Irritable bowel syndrome.
      • Gastroenteritis.
      Cancer causing abdominal pain
      Unexplained abdominal pain in patients >50 years may be caused by
      cancer, especially of the large bowel. The pain may result from transient
      or partial bowel obstruction. Ask about previous episodes of pain, weight
      loss and change of bowel habit. If there is no indication for admission,
      consider referral to a surgical clinic for investigation.
                                                          ACUTE APPENDICITIS              507

Acute appendicitis
This common cause of abdominal pain in all ages is particularly difﬁcult to
diagnose in the extremes of age and in pregnancy. However, the diagnosis
of acute appendicitis is often missed initially at all ages.
History
The classic presentation is of central colicky abdominal pain, followed by
vomiting, then shift of the pain to the right iliac fossa. Many presentations
are atypical, with a variety of other symptoms (eg altered bowel habit,
urinary frequency) partly depending upon the position of the tip of the
inﬂamed appendix (retrocaecal 74%; pelvic 21%; paracaecal 2%; other 3%).
Examination (see also Table 10.1)
In the early stages, there may be little abnormal; in the late stages the patient
may be moribund with septic shock and generalized peritonitis. Between
these extremes, there may be a variety of ﬁndings, including i T°, tachy-
cardia, distress, foetor oris. There is usually a degree of tenderness in the
right iliac fossa (±peritonitis). Rovsing’s sign (pain felt in the right iliac fossa on
pressing over the left iliac fossa) may be present. PR examination may reveal
tenderness high up on the right with inﬂammation of a pelvic appendix.
Investigations
The diagnosis of acute appendicitis is essentially clinical. CT and X-rays are
not routinely indicated, but perform urinalysis ± pregnancy test. Although
FBC may reveal an i WCC, this is not invariable.
Differential diagnosis
Depending upon the presentation, the potential differential diagnosis is very
wide—remember to consider urinary, chest, and gynaecological causes.
Treatment
• Obtain IV access and resuscitate if necessary. Commence IV ﬂuids if
  there is evidence of dehydration.
• Give IV opioid and antiemetic (eg slow IV metoclopramide 10mg).
• If acute appendicitis is likely, or even possible, keep ‘nil by mouth’ and
  refer to the surgeon. If appendicectomy is required, pre-operative antibi-
  otics (eg cefuroxime + metronidazole) d risk of infective complications.
Appendix mass
Untreated, acute appendicitis may proceed to perforation with general-
ized peritonitis, or may become ‘walled off’ to produce a localized right
iliac fossa inﬂammatory mass. There are many causes of such a mass. Refer
to the surgeon for further investigation and management.

 Table 10.1 Causes of a right iliac fossa mass
 • Appendix mass                             • Iliac lymphadenitis
 • Caecal carcinoma                          • Psoas abscess
 • Crohn’s disease                           • Retroperitoneal tumour
 • Ovarian mass                              • Actinomycosis
 • Pelvic kidney                             • Common iliac artery aneurysm
 • Enlarged gall bladder                     • Spigelian hernia
 • Iliocaecal TB
508    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Acute pancreatitis
      This is a relatively common serious cause of abdominal pain in the middle
      aged and elderly, with an incidence of ≈5 per 100,000/year.
      Causes
      Often due to gallstones and alcohol. Many are idiopathic. Other causes:
      hypothermia, trauma, infection (glandular fever, mumps, Coxsackie, and
      infectious hepatitis), hyperlipidaemia, hyperparathyroidism, drugs (steroids,
      azathioprine, thiazides, and statins), polyarteritis nodosa, pancreatic
      cancer.
      Symptoms
      Typically, the complaint is of severe constant epigastric pain radiating to
      the centre of the back, with associated nausea and vomiting.
      Signs
      The patient may be distressed, sweating and mildly pyrexial. Look for evi-
      dence of shock—there may be a need for urgent resuscitation. Abdominal
      tenderness is likely to be maximal in the epigastrium ± guarding. The oft-
      quoted, but uncommon bluish discolouration in the loins (Grey Turner’s
      sign) only develops after several days.
      Investigations
      • Check BMG and SpO2.
      • Serum amylase is likely to be grossly i to >5 × upper limit of normal
        range (but if not diagnostically i, consider urinary amylase level).
      • FBC may reveal i WCC.
      • U&E, Ca2+, LFTs, glucose—hypocalcaemia is relatively common.
      • Coagulation screen.
      • CXR, ECG, ABG; consider lactate if unwell.
      Treatment
      • Provide oxygen (O2).
      • Obtain IV access and resuscitate with IV ﬂuids as necessary.
      • Give IV analgesia (eg morphine titrated according to response—
        b Approach to abdominal pain, p.504).
      • Give an anti-emetic (eg cyclizine 50mg or metoclopramide 10mg
        slow IV).
      • Insert an nasogastric (NG) tube.
      • Insert a urinary catheter and monitor urine output.
      • Consider early insertion of a central venous line to monitor the central
        venous pressure (CVP) and guide IV ﬂuid therapy in the seriously ill,
        particularly the elderly.
      • Contact the appropriate specialist(s) and transfer to HDU/ICU.
                                                 ACUTE PANCREATITIS           509

Complications of acute pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis has a signiﬁcant mortality. Early complications
include acute renal failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
hypocalcaemia, adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Later,
pancreatic abscess or pseudo-cyst may occur. The risk of death may
be predicted according to the number of prognostic indicators present
(Glasgow scoring system).
3 or more of the following on admission and subsequent repeat tests over
48hr constitutes severe disease:
Age >55yrs; WCC >15 × 109/L; fasting glucose >10mmol/L; urea
>16mmol/L; arterial partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) <7.9kPa; Ca2+
<2mmol/L; albumin <32g/L; serum LDH >600U/L; AST >100U/L.

Chronic pancreatitis
The term chronic pancreatitis implies permanent pancreatic damage. The
condition often results from alcohol excess. Some patients with chronic
pancreatitis present frequently to the ED requesting opioid analgesia. This
can pose a difﬁcult problem for the doctor who has not treated them
previously. Follow the approach shown opposite and request previous
hospital case notes early.
510    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Biliary tract problems
      The majority of emergency biliary tract problems relate to gallstones.
      Both solitary cholesterol and multiple mixed gallstones are common
      amongst the middle aged and elderly. Pigment stones comprise a small
      proportion—they occur in hereditary spherocytosis, malaria, and
      haemolytic anaemia.
      Complications of gallstones Acute and chronic cholecystitis, biliary colic,
      obstructive jaundice, ascending cholangitis, mucocoele, empyema, acute
      pancreatitis, gallstone ileus, carcinoma of the gallbladder.
      Acute cholecystitis
      History Impaction of gallstones with acute inﬂammation of the gallbladder
      usually manifests itself by right hypochondrial pain radiating to the right
      side of the back ± vomiting.
      Examination Look for features of an acute inﬂammatory process. Fever
      is frequently present, combined with right hypochondrial tenderness
      (particularly felt on inspiration—Murphy’s sign). There may be a palpable
      mass—this is also a feature of mucocoele and empyema (the latter causing
      high fever, extreme tenderness and septic shock).
      Management
      • Provide IV analgesia and anti-emetic (see b Analgesics: opioids, p.276).
      • Check FBC (WCC often i), U&E, glucose, amylase, LFTs.
      • CXR, ECG (in case pain is due to atypical presentation of MI).
      • USS will conﬁrm the diagnosis (tenderness on pressing the USS
        transducer over the area where the thickened gallbladder containing
        stones is located is called the ultrasonic Murphy’s sign).
      • Commence antibiotics (eg cefotaxime 1g IV) and refer to the surgeon.
      Biliary colic/chronic cholecystitis
      Patients (sometimes with known gallstones) may present with short-lived
      recurrent episodes of epigastric/right hypochondrial pain ± radiation to
      the back. This pain of biliary colic/chronic cholecystitis may be difﬁcult to
      distinguish from other causes, including peptic ulcer disease. If the pain has
      subsided and there are no residual abnormal physical signs, discharge the
      patient with arrangements for GP or surgical outpatient follow-up.
      Common bile duct stones
      Stones within the common bile duct can cause several problems:
      • Acute pancreatitis (b p.508).
      • Obstructive jaundice.
      • Ascending infection.
      Obstructive jaundice
      Biliary obstruction results in i jaundice with pale stools and dark urine
      (±pain). Acute hepatitis and cholangio-/pancreatic carcinoma may present
      in a similar fashion. A palpable gallbladder implicates pancreatic carcinoma
      as the more likely diagnosis (Courvoisier’s law: ‘In the presence of jaun-
      dice, if the gallbladder is palpable, the cause is unlikely to be a stone’).
      Ascending cholangitis
      Biliary stasis predisposes to infection, characterized by Charcot’s triad
      (abdominal pain, jaundice, and fever). The patient may be very ill and require
      resuscitation for septic shock (b p.59).
                                                   PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE           511

Peptic ulcer disease
Perforated peptic ulcer
History Perforation of a gastric or duodenal ulcer is usually a severely
painful sudden event. It may occur in those without known peptic ulcer
disease, as well as those with previously diagnosed problems. However,
close questioning may reveal recent symptoms attributed to ‘indigestion’.
Sudden localized epigastric pain spreads to the remainder of the
abdomen—the pain is worse on coughing or moving and may radiate to
the shoulder tip.
Examination Although distressed, the patient often prefers to lie still,
rather than roll about. However, some patients in extreme pain writhe or
roll in agony and are unable to keep still for examination or X-rays until
analgesia is given. Absent bowel sounds, shock, generalized peritonitis and
fever develop as time passes.
Investigations An erect CXR will demonstrate free gas under the
diaphragm in ≈75% of patients with perforated peptic ulceration (if the
patient is not ﬁt enough for an erect CXR, obtain a left lateral decubitus
X-ray). In those cases where the diagnosis is suspected, but not proven by
X-ray, a contrast CT scan may help.
Other relevant investigations are: U&E, glucose, amylase (may be slightly i),
FBC (WCC typically i), SpO2, ABG, ECG/troponin (ensure symptoms do
not reﬂect MI rather than peptic ulcer disease).
Treatment
• Give O2.
• Provide IV analgesia (eg morphine titrated according to response).
• Give an antiemetic (eg slow IV metoclopramide 10mg).
• Resuscitate with IV 0.9% saline.
• Refer to the surgeon and give IV antibiotics (eg cefotaxime 1g and in
  late presentations, metronidazole 500mg as well).
Other GI perforations
Perforations may affect any part of the GI tract, but the chief causes are
peptic ulceration, trauma, diverticular disease, and colonic carcinoma. The
emergency treatment principles are similar to those of perforated peptic
ulcer (described above). Bowel perforation usually results in gas under the
diaphragm on an erect CXR, but remember that there are other possible
causes, including: recent surgery, peritoneal dialysis, gas-forming infections,
and occasionally, vaginal gas insufﬂation during waterskiing, or oral sex.
Other presentations of peptic ulcer disease
In addition to perforation, peptic ulcer disease may also present with
upper or lower GI haemorrhage (b p.122), or pain from oesophagitis,
gastritis or duodenitis. If the patient’s presentation suggests inﬂammation
of the upper GI tract, consider discharging the patient with a supply of
antacid and GP follow-up. This course of action is not appropriate if there
is any possibility of serious complication. Similarly, it is not usually appro-
priate to initiate therapy with H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors in
the ED without an accurate diagnosis.
512    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Intestinal obstruction
      Intestinal obstruction may be mechanical or paralytic in nature.
      Paralytic intestinal obstruction is relatively rare in the ED. Causes include
      postoperative ileus, electrolyte disturbance (eg hypokalaemia) and
      pseudo-obstruction (see opposite).
      Causes of mechanical intestinal obstruction
      • Adhesions after previous surgery.
      • Obstructed hernia (commonly: inguinal, femoral, para-umbilical,
        incisional; rarely: obturator, Spigelian, lumbar).
      • Tumours (gastric, pancreatic or large bowel carcinoma).
      • Volvulus (gastric, caecal or most commonly, sigmoid)—see b p.516.
      • Inﬂammatory mass (eg diverticular, Crohn’s).
      • Peptic ulcer disease.
      • Gallstone ileus.
      • Intussusception.
      History
      Classic symptoms of intestinal obstruction are: abdominal pain, distension,
      vomiting, and constipation. The exact presentation depends upon the
      site of obstruction and the underlying cause. Ask about previous surgery.
      A history of severe pain suggests strangulation and developing ischaemia
      in a closed loop. The nature of the vomit (eg faeculent) may give a clue to
      the site of obstruction.
      Examination
      Check T°. Look for evidence of dehydration or shock. Carefully examine
      the hernial oriﬁces (an obstructed femoral hernia is otherwise easily
      missed). Inspect for scars from old surgery. Note any distension and
      areas of tenderness (peritonism implies the surgical problem is advanced).
      Bowel sounds may be tinkling or absent. PR examination may reveal an
      ‘empty’ rectum.
      Investigations
      Blood tests Check U&E, glucose, amylase, FBC, LFTs, clotting, group, and
      save.
      X-rays Request CXR and supine abdominal X-rays. If there is no con-
      vincing evidence of obstruction on the supine view, but still a high index of
      clinical suspicion, consider requesting an erect abdominal ﬁlm. X-rays may
      demonstrate distended loops of bowel (with multiple ﬂuid levels visible
      on an erect abdominal view). The site and nature of the distended bowel
      loops may suggest the site of obstruction. Note that although gallstone
      ileus is rare, X-rays may be diagnostic—the ﬁstula between the bowel and
      gallbladder allows gas into the biliary tree, which shows up as an abnormal
      Y-shaped gas shadow in the right hypochondrium).
      ECG Obtain this if the patient is middle-aged or elderly.
      ABG If the patient is shocked, check SpO2, ABG and lactate.
      Old notes Request previous hospital case notes as soon as possible.
                                           INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION             513

Management of mechanical obstruction
• Insert an IV cannula and start IVI 0.9% saline.
• If the patient is shocked, resuscitate with O2 and IV ﬂuids and insert a
  urinary catheter. Consider the need to insert a central venous line to
  guide resuscitation and involve ICU specialists at an early stage.
• Provide analgesia (eg IV morphine titrated according to response—
  b Analgesics: opioids, p.276).
• Give an anti-emetic (eg cyclizine 50mg).
• Insert a NG tube.
• Refer to the surgical team for ongoing care.

Intestinal pseudo-obstruction
This condition results from chronic impairment of GI motility. Many of
the patients affected are elderly and taking tricyclic antidepressants or
other drugs with anticholinergic actions. Although pseudo-obstruction
may involve any part of the GI tract, it typically presents with colonic
distension. On rare occasions, this may be sufﬁciently severe to rupture
the caecum or cause hypotension by compressing the inferior vena cava
and blocking venous return. There may be a diagnostic X-ray appearance
showing gas in the bowel all the way to the rectum, whereas in a classical,
more proximal obstruction, gas will be absent from the rectum. Treatment
of acute colonic distension from pseudo-obstruction is by decompression
using a colonoscope.
514    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Mesenteric ischaemia/infarction
      Acute mesenteric infarction
      Abrupt cessation of the blood supply to a large portion of the gut results
      in irreversible gangrene of the bowel within a relatively short space of
      time. This is associated with a very high mortality. Unfortunately, however,
      the diagnosis can be very difﬁcult to make—the challenge therefore lies
      with making an early diagnosis.
      Pathophysiology
      One or more of the following processes may be responsible:
      • Mesenteric arterial embolism (often associated with AF).
      • Mesenteric arterial thrombosis.
      • d Mesenteric arterial blood ﬂow (eg hypotension secondary to MI).
      • Mesenteric venous thrombosis.
      Most cases involve either arterial embolism or thrombosis.
      History
      Acute mesenteric infarction usually occurs in middle-aged or elderly
      patients. It is often heralded by severe, sudden onset, diffuse abdominal
      pain. Typically, the severity of the pain initially far exceeds the associated
      physical signs. The pain may radiate to the back.
      Some patients have a preceding history of chronic mesenteric ischaemia,
      with pain after meals and weight loss. There is often an associated history
      of vascular disease elsewhere (eg intermittent claudication).
      Examination
      Shock, absent bowel sounds, abdominal distension, and tenderness are
      late signs. Initially, there may be little more than diffuse mild abdominal
      tenderness. If the diagnosis is suspected, search carefully for evidence of
      an embolic source (eg AF, recent MI with high risk of mural thrombus,
      aortic valve disease or valve prosthesis, recent cardiac catheter).
      Investigations
      • U&E, BMG, and laboratory blood glucose.
      • Amylase may be moderately i
      • FBC may demonstrate i WCC.
      • Coagulation screen.
      • Group and save.
      • ABG typically reveals a severe metabolic acidosis and lactate may be i.
      • X-rays may show non-speciﬁc dilatation of bowel loops and, in advanced
        cases, gas within the hepatic portal venous system.
      • ECG may demonstrate AF.
      • Other specialist investigations (USS, CT, angiography) may be helpful,
        but let the surgeon decide about this.
      Management
      If the diagnosis is suspected:
      • Resuscitate with O2 and IV ﬂuids.
      • Provide analgesia (eg IV morphine titrated according to response).
      • Consider broad spectrum IV antibiotics.
      • Refer urgently to the surgeon.
                                  MESENTERIC ISCHAEMIA/INFARCTION                 515

Ischaemic colitis
Chronic arterial insufﬁciency to the bowel usually affects the mucosa and
submucosa, typically in the region of the splenic ﬂexure (junction of territory
supplied by the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries).
The patient presents with abdominal pain, starting in the left iliac fossa.
Loose stools with blood may be passed. The patient may have had
previous similar episodes and exhibit evidence of cardiovascular disease.
Examination may reveal a low grade pyrexia, tachycardia, and colonic
tenderness with blood PR.
Check FBC, U&E, group and save, ECG, CXR. Plain abdominal X-rays
may show ‘thumb printing’ (submucosal colonic oedema), typically at the
splenic ﬂexure. Provide analgesia, IV ﬂuids, and refer to the surgical team.
516    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Large bowel emergencies
      Volvulus (see bowel obstruction—b p.512)
      Responsible for ≈10% of large bowel obstruction. Occurs at the caecum
      or, more commonly, the sigmoid, due to poor ﬁxation in their respective
      iliac fossae.
      Sigmoid volvulus usually occurs in the elderly with initially intermittent
      cramping lower abdominal pain and progressive abdominal distension,
      which may be spontaneously relieved by passage of large amounts of
      ﬂatus/faeces. Some patient’s progress to complete obstruction: marked
      distension progressing to fever and peritonitis suggests strangulation.
      Plain abdominal X-ray typically shows a large single dilated loop of colon
      (a ‘bent inner tube’) on the left side with both ends down in the pelvis.
      Refer to the inpatient surgical team for sigmoidoscopy (if not strangulated)
      or surgery if strangulated.
      Caecal volvulus is most common between the ages of 25–35yr. Patients
      have symptoms of acute onset small bowel obstruction.
      Plain abdominal ﬁlms usually show one large dilated segment of the colon
      in the mid-abdomen with distended small bowel loops and empty distal
      large bowel. Refer to the surgical team.
      Diverticular disease
      Diverticulosis is common in the middle-aged and elderly, particularly
      affecting the sigmoid colon. Without signiﬁcant complications, there may
      be a change in bowel habit with passage of mucus.
      Acute diverticulitis
      Results from inﬂammation/perforation of a diverticulum and may be con-
      ﬁned to colonic wall by the serosa. If this perforates, then inﬂammation may
      remain localized (pericolic abscess) or spread (frank peritonitis). Symptoms
      and signs reﬂect the extent of the infection—there may be lower abdom-
      inal dull constant pain, low grade fever with tenderness, rigidity and occa-
      sionally a mass in the left lower quadrant. The elderly (the group most at
      risk of diverticulitis and its complications), and those on immunosuppres-
      sants may not manifest the expected pyrexia and signs of peritonitis.
      Investigations Check FBC, U&E, CRP, group and save, and blood cultures.
      Plain abdominal X-rays may show non-speciﬁc changes and help to
      exclude perforation/large bowel obstruction. An erect CXR often shows
      copious subdiaphragmatic gas in free perforations.
      Treatment Give analgesia, IV ﬂuids, keep fasted, and refer to the surgeon.
      Start broad spectrum antibiotics (eg cefuroxime + metronidazole).
      Complications
      • Perforation: may be localized and walled off (forming an abscess), or
         generalized.
      • Intestinal obstruction: both large and small (due to adherent loops).
      • Massive PR bleeding.
      • Fistulae to adjacent structures: small bowel, uterus, vagina, bladder.
      • Post-infective strictures.
                                         LARGE BOWEL EMERGENCIES              517

Ulcerative colitis
Severe acute colitis is characterized by the passage of >6 loose bloody
motions per day, together with systemic signs (tachycardia, fever) and
hypoalbuminaemia. There is a risk of haemorrhage, perforation and toxic
megacolon. The crucial points in management are early recognition and
prompt referral to the inpatient gastroenterology service, for aggressive
medical therapy (IV and PR steroids, IV ﬂuids) and joint review by medical
and surgical teams. Surgery may be required for complications, especially
toxic megacolon. Suspect toxic megacolon if the colonic width is >5.5cm
on abdominal X-ray (this sign is associated with a 75% risk of requiring
colectomy). Refer any patient who presents with suspected new onset
ulcerative colitis for investigation and control of the disease.
Mesenteric ischaemia/infarction
See b p.514.
Crohn’s disease
Colonic Crohn’s disease may present as colitis with bloody diarrhoea,
urgency and frequency, similar to ulcerative colitis.
Fibrosis may cause diarrhoea or obstructive symptoms.
Peri-anal disease with chronic anal ﬁssure may be the ﬁrst presenting
symptom. Emergency surgery is indicated in acute fulminating Crohn’s
colitis with bleeding, toxic dilatation, or perforation.
Epiploic appendagitis
Primary inﬂammation of one of the hundreds of appendices epiploicae on
the antimesenteric colonic border may present in similar fashion to acute
diverticulitis or appendicitis. However, T° and WCC are usually normal.
Although often diagnosed at laparotomy, CT scan may be characteristic,
allowing conservative treatment (including IV analgesia).
Irritable bowel syndrome
Patients are usually aged 20–40 years with a prolonged history of inter-
mittent symptoms—altered bowel function (diarrhoea, constipation, or
diarrhoea alternating with constipation). Typically, the abdominal pain
is crampy/aching and localized in the lower abdomen over the sigmoid
colon. Pain may be eased by the passage of stool or ﬂatus. Examination
fails to reveal any worrying features. The diagnosis is one of exclusion—be
vigilant for clues that may point to other organic disease.
518    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Anorectal problems
      Any PR bleeding requires surgical follow-up to exclude malignancy.
      Complications of haemorrhoids (‘piles’)
      • Bleeding: haemorrhoids typically cause painless, bright red PR bleeding,
        associated with defaecation, but blood is not mixed with the stools.
        Check the abdomen and inspect the anus—if there is no prolapsed or
        external haemorrhoid, perform PR and arrange surgical follow-up.
      • Prolapsed piles are acutely painful—treat conservatively with adequate
        analgesia (may need admission), bed rest, and stool softeners.
      • Thrombosed external pile is due to rupture of a tributary of the inferior
        haemorrhoidal vein, producing a peri-anal haematoma. One or more
        dark blue nodules covered with squamous epithelium may be visible at
        the anus and a clot palpable. Refer to the surgeon to decide between
        incision and drainage under LA or conservative management.
      Anal ﬁssure
      Typically causes severe pain on defaecation and for 1–2hr afterwards.
      There may be blood on the toilet paper, but usually bleeding is minimal. The
      ﬁssure is located just inside the anal oriﬁce and is usually associated with
      the passage of hard stools. Most are located posteriorly in the midline. PR
      examination may be impossible due to pain, but the ﬁssure is often visible
      with traction of anal skin.
      Treatment Prescribe analgesia and stool softeners. Most heal spon-
      taneously, but the presence of signiﬁcant ulceration, hypertrophied
      tissue, or a skin tag suggests chronicity and need for surgical follow-up. Be
      suspicious of those ﬁssures not in the midline and those that are multiple
      (the differential diagnosis includes chronic inﬂammatory bowel disease,
      anal cancer and adenocarcinoma of the rectum invading the anal canal).
      Pruritus ani
      Not strictly an emergency problem. There are numerous possible causes:
      • Poor hygiene.
      • Fissure, prolapsing piles, ﬁstulae, rectal prolapse, anal cancer.
      • Contact dermatitis due to local applications (especially local anaes-
        thetics).
      • Threadworms.
      • Part of a general condition (eg obstructive jaundice, lymphoma, severe
        iron deﬁcency anaemia, uraemia, diabetes).
      • Lichen sclerosis.
      • Sexually transmitted disease (herpes, anal warts, HIV).
      Treatment requires identiﬁcation of the underlying problem–refer to the
      GP. In the meantime, advise avoidance of ointments and creams.
      Pilonidal abscess
      An infected pit in the natal cleft causes pain and/or offensive discharge.
      Treatment Refer to the surgical team. Treatment may involve initial incision
      and drainage, followed by healing, then elective excision of the sinus.
      Note: Fissures, tears or bruising around the anus of a child arouses
      suspicion of abuse in the ﬁrst instance. Refer to a specialist and avoid
      rectal examination.
                                               ANORECTAL PROBLEMS             519

Anorectal abscesses
Most begin with infection involving an anal crypt and its gland, from which
it can spread between the external and internal sphincters to a variety of
sites—these determine its symptomatology and mode of presentation.
Peri-anal and ischiorectal abscesses account for ≈80% of cases. In 20%,
there is a clear predisposing cause, such as inﬂammatory bowel disease,
anorectal cancer, or anal ﬁssure (Fig. 10.1).

                                                                      D

                                                   C

The four types of anorectal
abscess—(A) Perianal.
(B) Ischio-rectal. (C) Submucous.                                       B
(D) Pelvi-rectal.                                               A
(After W.F.W. Southwood, F.R.C.S., Bath).

Fig. 10.1 Types of anorectal abscesses.

Clinical features Pain is a prominent initial feature of peri-anal and
superﬁcial ischiorectal abscesses, followed by local signs of inﬂammation.
Patients complain of persistent dull throbbing pain, made worse by walking
and sitting, and prior to defaecation. Such symptoms are less evident with
deep infections, which tend to develop slowly with pyrexia and systemic
upset. Peri-anal abscesses produce localized ﬂuctuant red tender swellings
close to the anus. With ischiorectal sepsis, the ﬁndings are more diffuse
and ﬂuctuance is a late ﬁnding. Deeper infections are less obvious—PR
examination may reveal a mass or tender area of induration.
Treatment Provide analgesia and refer to the surgical team for incision
and drainage under GA.
Venereal proctitis
The organisms are similar to those transmitted by vaginal intercourse:
assume more than one type of organism is present. Patients complain of
pain, irritation, discharge, and bleeding. Consider gonococcus, chlamydia,
syphilis, herpes simplex. Refer urgently to a genitourinary specialist.
Rectal foreign bodies
X-rays may demonstrate the position and shape of FBs. More especially,
look for the presence of any free air—perforation of the rectum or colon
is the most frequent and most serious complication, in which case give
IV antibiotics (eg cephalosporin + metronidazole). Refer the patient for
removal of the FB by the surgical team.
520    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Retention of urine
      Causes of acute urinary retention
      This more commonly presents in the male:
      Common causes in males
      • Prostatic hyperplasia/cancer.
      • Urethral stricture.
      • Post-operative.
      Common causes in females
      • Retroverted gravid uterus.
      • Atrophic urethritis.
      • Multiple sclerosis.
      Other causes include: acute urethritis, prostatitis, phimosis, urethral
      rupture following trauma, bladder blood clot, urethral calculus, prolapsed
      intervertebral disc, drugs (alcohol, antihistamines, anticholinergics,
      antihypertensives, tricyclics), faecal impaction, anal pain.
      Presentation
      In most cases, the diagnosis is obvious: the patient complains of inability
      to pass urine combined with bladder discomfort. Remember, however,
      to consider the diagnosis in those patients unable to describe their symp-
      toms (eg those unconscious after trauma).
      Examination will reveal a tender enlarged bladder, with dullness to
      percussion well above the symphysis pubis. Search for the causes
      listed above. In particular, search for evidence of prolapsed disc/cord
      compression by checking the lower limb power/reﬂexes and perineal
      sensation. Perform PR examination to assess anal tone and the prostate.
      Initial management
      The patient requires urgent bladder decompression. Provided there is
      no contraindication (eg urinary retention following trauma or as a result
      of urethral stenosis), achieve this by urethral catheterization. Use an
      aseptic technique (male catheterization is described opposite). If urethral
      catheterization is impossible or contraindicated, consider the need for
      a suprapubic catheter, but this should only be performed by a doctor
      experienced in the technique.
      Further management
      After bladder drainage, record the volume of urine obtained, then
      re-examine the abdomen for pathology that might have been previously
      masked.
      Test the urine for the presence of blood and send a mid-stream specimen
      of urine (MSU) for culture and sensitivity. Perform investigations
      appropriate to the likely underlying cause, and then refer to the urology
      team.
                                                 RETENTION OF URINE           521

Chronic urinary retention
Patients with chronic retention often have massive, almost painless
bladder distension. They are at risk of pressure damage to the upper
urinary tract. Following drainage, they may develop haematuria or
post-obstructive diuresis, with attendant problems of signiﬁcant ﬂuid and
electrolyte derangements.
Male catheterization
• Prepare the equipment—a Foley catheter size 14G is appropriate for an
  adult. Ensure that the patient does not have an allergy to latex.
• Check the volume required for the catheter balloon.
• Wash hands and don sterile gloves.
• Clean the external genitalia with antiseptic solution and surround with a
  sterile ﬁeld.
• Slowly insert local anaesthetic into the urethra.
• Gently massage the local anaesthetic down the urethra and wait for a
  few minutes for the LA to take effect.
• Holding the penis at right angles to the body, insert the lubricated
  catheter. The catheter should pass easily into the bladder with drainage
  of urine. If any resistance or difﬁculty is encountered, stop and seek
  senior assistance.
• Once urine appears, advance the catheter a few centimeters further
  before inﬂating the balloon.
• Connect the catheter to a closed drainage system and tape the tubing
  to the upper thigh.
• Ensure that the foreskin is not left retracted—this could result in
  paraphimosis.
522    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Testicular problems
      Remember that any pain of testicular origin may be initially referred to
      the abdomen.
      Testicular torsion
      Testicular torsion is most frequently seen in children and young adults.
      Any suspicion of testicular torsion should prompt immediate referral. The
      condition is covered fully on b Inguinal and scrotal swellings, p.700.
      Acute epididymitis
      Causes
      For those aged <35 years, infection with chlamydia or gonococcus is com-
      monly responsible. Acute epididymitis in those aged >35 years is usually
      secondary to UTI and associated with underlying urinary tract pathology.
      Clinical features
      There is typically a gradual onset of progressive testicular ache, with sub-
      sequent swelling of the epididymis and testis. There may be a history of
      dysuria or urethral discharge. The patient may be pyrexial. The epididymis
      is acutely tender, with the testis lying low in the scrotum. Advanced, late
      cases may have progressed to abscess formation.
      Investigations
      Send an MSU and take a urethral swab (take lab advice regarding the
      correct media for chlamydia).
      Management
      The chief initial concern is to ensure that testicular torsion is not being
      missed: if there is any possibility of this (b Inguinal and scrotal swellings,
      p.700), refer urgently. Treatment of acute epididymitis comprises antibi-
      otics (eg ciproﬂoxacin for 2 weeks), analgesia, and rest. Some patients
      require admission; others may be managed on an outpatient basis. Urology
      investigation and follow-up will be required, so involve the urologist early.
      Patients with suspected chlamydia or gonococcus require appropriate
      advice and contact tracing of sexual partners.
      Orchitis
      Orchitis may present as epididymo-orchitis, an extension of bacterial
      epididymitis (see above). Orchitis of viral origin may also occur—typically
      mumps, following ≈5days after parotitis. Mumps orchitis may be unilateral
      or bilateral and can occur in the absence of overt parotitis. Rarely, orchitis
      is secondary to tuberculosis (TB) or syphilis.
      Treatment
      All patients with orchitis require analgesia and follow-up. If there is any
      possibility of bacterial infection, antibiotics are indicated (see above).
      Testicular lumps
      Patients may present to the ED with scrotal/testicular lumps. Causes are
      varied and include: hydrocoele, inguinal hernia, epididymal cyst, epidi-
      dymitis, orchitis, and testicular tumour. Many patients will be managed
      appropriately by referral back to GP or to an outpatient clinic. Be particu-
      larly wary of an apparent epididymo-orchitis which has failed to respond
      to antibiotics—it could be an atypical presentation of a testicular tumour.
      Testicular trauma—See b p.352.
                                  PENILE PROBLEMS AND PROSTATITIS                523

Penile problems and prostatitis
Paraphimosis
Paraphimosis occurs when the foreskin is left retracted, thereby causing
swelling of the glans, which results in difﬁculty replacing the foreskin to
its proper position. Untreated, tissue necrosis may develop. Paraphimosis
may be iatrogenic, occurring after urethral catheterization.
Treatment Initially attempt reduction by manual decompression, which
may require the use of Entonox®, IV sedation, or LA (a small amount
of topical 1–2% lidocaine gel or injection of 10mL plain 1% lidocaine
around the base of the penis). Digital pressure may allow the glans to
d in size, prior to the foreskin being delivered back into its usual position.
If unsuccessful, refer to the surgical team for reduction under GA or
dorsal slit of the prepuce followed by later circumcision.
Priapism
Priapism is persistent (and usually painful) penile erection.
Causes
• Iatrogenic (following intra-cavernosal injection of one or more of:
   papaverine, alprostadil, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, phentolamine
   for impotence).
• Others: leukaemia, myeloma, sickle cell disease, spinal injury, drugs
   (eg sildenaﬁl [Viagra], phenothiazines, cannabis, cocaine), renal dialysis.
Management Priapism is a urological emergency. Refer urgently to the
urology team. Initial emergency treatment of a prolonged (>6hr) artiﬁcial
erection (ie following an intra-cavernosal drug injection or oral sildenaﬁl)
is to aspirate 50mL of blood from each corpus cavernosum through a
19G butterﬂy needle into a 50mL syringe with a Luer lock.
Urethritis
This usually presents with dysuria/urinary frequency, reﬂecting underlying
STD. Refer for appropriate investigation, treatment, and follow-up.
Prostatitis
Inﬂammation of the prostate may be acute or chronic and present in a
variety of ways (fever, urgency, frequency, perineal pain, urethral dis-
charge). PR examination reveals a tender prostate. Urinalysis demonstrates
protein. Refer for further investigation and treatment.
Penile trauma
Minor superﬁcial tears
These are relatively common. Most involve the frenulum. The patient
complains of pain and bleeding following sexual intercourse. Bleeding
usually responds to local pressure (if this is not successful, consider tissue
glue or refer to the surgical team). Once bleeding has stopped, advise a
period of abstinence from sexual activity (≈10 days) to allow healing to
occur and prevent recurrence.
Fracture of the penis
This occurs infrequently. It involves injury to the tunica albuginea of the
erect penis. The result is penile tenderness and swelling. Refer to the urolo-
gist for urgent surgical exploration, evacuation of haematoma and repair.
524    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Ureteric colic
        New onset ﬂank/back pain in the elderly may represent a leaking
              aortic aneurysm (even if haematuria is present).
      Causes
      Calculi or blood clots may cause ureteric (or ‘renal’) colic. Colicky pain
      is produced by ureteric obstruction, i intraluminal pressure, and muscle
      spasm. Calculi most commonly consist of calcium oxalate and/or calcium
      phosphate. Less common are magnesium ammonium phosphate (associated
      with UTIs and urea-splitting organisms, such as Proteus), urate, and cystine
      stones.
      Calculi are associated with hypercalcaemia, hyperoxaluria and
      hyperuricaemia. ‘Staghorn’ calculi in the collecting system predispose to
      infections.
      Calculi may form throughout the length of the renal tract. They vary in size
      from tiny particles to large ‘stones’ in the bladder. They cause symptoms
      from local obstruction, infection, and rarely may ulcerate through the wall
      of the structure in which they are present.
      Clinical features
      The most common presenting symptoms are pain from obstruction or
      UTI and/or haematuria. Constant dull, severe, loin discomfort is associ-
      ated with excruciating colicky pain, spreading to the respective iliac fossa,
      testis, tip of penis or labia. The pain may cause the patient to move or walk
      about. Nausea, vomiting, pallor, sweating are common. There is frequently
      a previous history of stone disease—ask about this and whether there is
      any past history of renal disease. Ask about urinary and GI symptoms.
      Apart from loin tenderness, abdominal examination is usually normal,
      but check the haemodynamic status, pulses, bruits and the abdominal
      aorta, as a ruptured aortic aneurysm can present in a similar fashion
      (b p.530). Pyrexia or rigors suggest associated infection. Microscopic
      (sometimes frank) haematuria is common. Symptoms are usually relieved
      when the stone passes into the bladder, but larger calculi may then cause
      obstruction at the bladder neck or the urethra producing acute urinary
      retention. Bladder calculi may present with symptoms of UTI and/or
      bladder irritation (frequency, dysuria, strangury, and haematuria).
                                                         URETERIC COLIC          525

Investigations
• Urinalysis and MSU: blood on stix testing is present in >80% of patients
  with proven stones. A pH>7.6 implies associated infection with urea
  splitting organisms.
• U&E, creatinine, glucose, Ca2+, PO42–, urate levels.
• ‘KUB’ X-ray: 90% of urinary calculi are radio-opaque. X-ray is ≈50%
  sensitive and ≈70% speciﬁc for the diagnosis of ureteric calculi and is
  a very useful follow-up of patients with known stones. Common sites
  for calculi include the pelvi-ureteric and vesico-ureteric junctions.
  Remember that the ureters lie adjacent to the tips of the spinal trans-
  verse processes.
• Use USS/Doppler instead in pregnant patients or those with renal
  disease.
• CT without contrast is ≈95% sensitive and ≈95% speciﬁc and has the
  advantage of assisting diagnosis of other causes of abdominal and/or loin
  pain.
• Intravenous urography (IVU) is the most accurate investigation when
  CT is not available or where endoscopic or surgical treatment is
  contemplated. A delayed nephrogram on the affected side at 5min is
  common. As contrast enters the collecting system, the site and degree
  of the obstruction can be assessed.
Treatment
Give IV opioid titrated to effect, together with an NSAID (either IV keto-
ralac, or oral/rectal diclofenac). Do not use antispasmodics, anticholinergics
and ‘pushing ﬂuids’.
• Aim to discharge patients (with arrangements for appropriate outpa-
   tient investigation) when symptoms have completely resolved, and in
   whom the CT/IVU shows no obstruction. Note that in some patients
   the process of becoming pain-free merely represents complete obstruc-
   tion.
• Admit (for further investigation and treatment) patients whose pain
   persists, or in whom investigation conﬁrms continued obstruction,
   infection, sepsis or renal impairment.
526    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Abscesses
      An abscess is a localized collection of pus resulting in a painful soft tissue
      mass that is often ﬂuctuant, but surrounded by ﬁrm granulation tissue and
      erythema. The cause is usually bacterial, resulting from minor trauma to
      the epithelium/mucosa or blockage of apocrine glands. A history of a pre-
      vious lump at the site suggests infection of a sebaceous cyst. Check BMG
      in all patients.
      For patients with recurrent abscesses, check for signs of hidradenitis
      suppurativa, diabetes, inﬂammatory bowel disease, and malignancy. Ask
      about steroid use.
      Treatment
      Incision and drainage A general surgical principle is that a collection of
      pus requires drainage. On occasions, depending upon local policy, it may
      be appropriate to do this in the ED. Some abscesses (eg face, breast,
      perineum, paediatric) require specialist attention. Regional, parenteral,
      or GA may be needed to supplement LA which works poorly in this
      situation.
      Technique Incise along the length of the ﬂuctuance and deep enough
      to enter the cavity. An elliptical incision will prevent premature closure
      and re-accumulation of pus. Send pus for culture. Ensure that loculi in
      the cavity are gently broken by the use of a curette. Consider inserting
      a loose antiseptic wick in the cavity to ensure drainage and prevent
      premature closure.
      Antibiotics are not indicated in patients with normal host defences as long
      as the abscess is localized. Evidence of surrounding or spreading infection
      may warrant antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav or penicillin + ﬂucloxacillin) and
      on occasions, admission (see below).
      Refer the following:
      • Those who are systemically unwell (pyrexial, tachycardic, rigors),
        immuno-compromised and those not responding to treatment.
      • Abscesses secondary to IV drug misuse.
      • Those with infection in certain anatomical sites: face (i risk of cavernous
        sinus thrombosis), those potentially involving the airway (sublingual
        abscesses, Ludwig’s angina), axillary, groin, retropharyngeal, perineal,
        and breast abscesses.
      • Those with extensive or progressing cellulitis/lymphangitis.
      These patients may require IV antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav or ﬂucloxacillin
      + penicillin), analgesia and surgical drainage. Take blood for FBC,
      clotting studies and blood culture. Treat sepsis/septic shock where
      necessary (b p.59).
                                                              ABSCESSES        527

Breast infection
Lactational breast abscess These are usually peripherally located and due
to Staph. aureus. Local discomfort proceeds to painful swelling. Overlying
skin may be red. Extreme cases may undergo necrosis and spontaneous
discharge.
Treatment If seen prior to frank abscess formation, consider antibiotic
treatment alone—prescribe a penicillinase-resistant antibiotic. If there
is any suspicion of an abscess, refer for needle aspiration—if pus is
found, drainage will be needed. Encourage the infant to feed from the
contralateral breast whilst the affected side is emptied of milk manually
or by breast pump.
Non-lactational breast abscess Typically affects the 30–60-year age
group, usually peri-areolar, recurrent, and related to duct ectasia/
periductal mastitis. Refer for needle aspiration, culture, and antibiotics
(metronidazole and ﬂucloxacillin). Note that inﬂammatory breast cancer
may mimic septic mastitis and breast abscess. Incision of neoplastic lesions
may have disastrous results.
Perineal abscesses See b Anorectal problems, p.518.
528    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Cellulitis and erysipelas
      Cellulitis (see b Infected wounds and cellulitis, p.413)
      Cellulitis reﬂects bacterial skin infection (usually streptococcal, occasion-
      ally staphylococcal). It can occur in association with a skin wound acting
      as a portal of entry for infection (eg athlete’s foot), but it may also occur
      without any obvious breach in the skin. Ascertain whether or not there is
      evidence of systemic upset or any background problems, such as immuno-
      deﬁciency, diabetes, or steroid therapy.
      The area of affected skin is red, warm to the touch with poorly deﬁned
      margins. Check T° and look for lymphangitis and/or lymphadenopathy.
      Treatment depends upon the nature and extent of clinical ﬁndings as
      follows:
      • Treat patients who have localized limb infection and no evidence of
         systemic upset with oral antibiotics (either phenoxymethylpenicillin +
         ﬂucloxacillin or co-amoxiclav or erythromycin) and arrange follow-up
         in 24–48hr.
      • Admit patients who are systemically unwell or have spreading infection
         (eg lymphangitis extending above the knee from an area of cellulitis on
         the foot). Obtain venous access, take blood cultures and start IV antibi-
         otics (either benzylpenicillin + ﬂucloxacillin or co-amoxiclav).
      Patients with cellulitis of the face (particularly around the eye) are
      at risk of signiﬁcant intracranial complications (notably cavernous
      sinus thrombosis)—start IV antibiotics and refer for admission to the
      ophthalmology team.
      Erysipelas
      This streptococcal infection is limited to the more superﬁcial parts of
      the skin, resulting in an area of redness and heat with clearly deﬁned
      margins. Treat with antibiotics as outlined for cellulitis above, except that
      phenoxymethylpenicillin alone (500mg PO qds for 7 days) sufﬁces in most
      cases.
      Necrotizing fasciitis
      See b Streptococcal infections, p.234.
                                   COMPLICATIONS OF VARICOSE VEINS                   529

Complications of varicose veins
Occasionally, patients may attend the ED with complications of their
varicose veins.
Bleeding from varicose veins
Patients with chronic venous hypertension associated with varicose veins
have a signiﬁcant risk of haemorrhage from the dilated thin-walled veins
which commonly surround the area of lipodermatosclerosis at the ankle.
Haemorrhages may be profuse and sufﬁcient to cause hypovolemic shock.
In extreme cases, this may even cause death.
Treatment
Control bleeding by elevating the leg, applying a non-adherent dressing
and pressing ﬁrmly. Follow this with appropriate bandaging; unless there
is evidence of occlusive arterial disease (varicose veins and arterial disease
frequently co-exist in the elderly). Some patients may require resuscita-
tion with IV ﬂuids.
Refer for admission those who were shocked at presentation, those
who have subsequently bled through the bandaging, those with occlusive
arterial disease, and those who live alone. All patients will require surgical
outpatient follow-up—advise patients who are discharged about ﬁrst aid
measures in the event of a rebleed.
Superﬁcial thrombophlebitis
This occurs most frequently in patients with varicose veins or prothrom-
botic states (eg underlying inﬂammatory and malignant conditions). It
usually manifests itself with redness, tenderness and induration along the
course of the involved vein.
Treatment
Bed rest, elevation, and analgesia (NSAID). Pain typically d over 1–2 weeks
and the patient is left with a hard thrombotic cord. Superﬁcial throm-
bophlebitis is only rarely associated with DVT, but occasionally thrombosis
spreads from the long saphenous vein to involve the femoral vein. If there
is any question of deep vein involvement, request an USS. If the thrombotic
process involves the sapheno-femoral junction or the ilio-femoral system,
refer for anticoagulation (b p.170).
Venous ulcers
Venous (varicose) ulcers tend to be chronic and recurrent. They are typi-
cally found on the medial side of the ankle. There is often associated derma-
titis with surrounding brown discolouration, thickening of the skin and leg
oedema. There is often mixed venous and arterial disease, especially in the
elderly. Although ischaemic ulcers tend to lie on the lateral aspect of the
ankle, exclude ischaemic ulceration by checking the peripheral pulses (request
Doppler in patients with oedematous legs). Look for areas suspicious of
malignant change, which may rarely occur in chronic ulcers (Marjolin’s ulcer).
Treatment
Clean the ulcer with normal saline and dress it with either parafﬁn gauze
or colloidal dressing. Follow this with ﬁrm bandaging (unless there is co-
existing arterial disease) and advise leg elevation when the patient rests.
Avoid dressings with topical antibiotics and indiscriminate use of oral anti-
biotics. Prescribe oral antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav) only if there is cellulitis.
Liaise with the GP about the need for surgical outpatient follow-up and to
arrange for redressing by the district nurse.
530    CHAPTER 10 Surgery

      Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
      Middle-aged and elderly people frequently develop abdominal aortic aneu-
      rysms. Rupture is relatively common and responsible for a large number
      of deaths, many of which occur suddenly out of hospital. Even when the
      patient reaches hospital alive, there is a signiﬁcant mortality. The patient’s
      best chance of survival lies with early diagnosis, prompt resuscitation and
      rapid transfer to theatre. Most aneurysms are saccular and found in the
      infrarenal portion of the aorta—haemorrhage after rupture is usually into
      the retroperitoneum. Aneurysm extension to involve the renal arteries
      renders surgery more difﬁcult and i risk of post-operative complications.
      History
      Presentation is highly variable, ranging from PEA cardiac arrest to painless
      sudden collapse of obscure origin, through to a classical history of central
      abdominal and lower back pain in a patient with a known aneurysm. Pain is
      usually a feature: typically sudden in onset and severe in nature.
      Examination
      The seriously ill patient may present a characteristic picture: distressed,
      pale, sweating, tachycardic, and hypotensive, with mottled skin of the
      lower body and a tender pulsatile abdominal mass. One or both femoral
      pulses may be absent.
      Diagnosis
      Ruptured aortic aneurysm is not infrequently misdiagnosed as ureteric colic.
      Adopt a low threshold of suspicion in any middle aged or elderly patient
      who presents with back pain, abdominal pain or collapse. In some patients
      (eg the obese), it may be difﬁcult to be certain about the presence of a pul-
      satile abdominal mass. In such cases, assume that the problem is a ruptured
      abdominal aortic aneurysm and commence resuscitative measures, whilst
      appropriate experts are summoned and relevant emergency conﬁrmatory
      investigations (eg USS or CT scan) are performed. It may be safer and quicker
      to perform USS in the ED, rather than transfer the patient for CT scan.
      Management
      • Provide high ﬂow O2.
      • Obtain venous access with 2 large bore venous cannulae.
      • Send blood for FBC, U&E, glucose, baseline coagulation screen, LFTs
        and emergency X-matching (10U red cells + 8U platelets + 8U fresh
        frozen plasma).
      • Provide IV analgesia (eg morphine titrated according to response).
      • Provide IV anti-emetic (eg cyclizine 50mg).
      • Give IV ﬂuids as necessary, but avoid excessive ﬂuid resuscitation. Treat
        major hypovolaemia, but accept moderate degrees of hypotension
        (systolic BP > 90mmHg). In general, patients who are conscious and
        passing urine require minimal IV ﬂuid therapy until they reach theatre.
      • Obtain a CXR.
      • Insert a urinary catheter and a radial arterial line and record an ECG.
      • Call the vascular surgeon and anaesthetist at an early stage: aortic cross-
        clamping is the mainstay of resuscitation in the unstable patient.
      • Ensure that other relevant staff (eg emergency theatre staff) are
        informed.
                                                  ACUTE LIMB ISCHAEMIA            531

Acute limb ischaemia
Clinical features
Irrespective of the cause, the cardinal features of acute limb ischaemia are
summarized by the 6 P’s:
• Pain.
• Paraesthesia (later anaesthesia).
• Pallor (later mottled, cyanosed).
• Pulselessness.
• Paralysis (due to muscle damage—this may be irreversible after 4–6hr).
• Perishing cold.
Where an acute arterial occlusion occurs in a previously normal limb,
the features of ischaemia will be i because of the absence of a developed
collateral circulation. In the absence of a traumatic cause (either direct
arterial injury, or indirect injury such as compartment syndrome—b Crush
syndrome, p.398) the commonest causes are embolism or thrombosis.
Embolic
Cardiac sources account for >80% (AF, post MI, prosthetic valves, atrial
myxoma, vegetations, and rheumatic heart disease). Acute embolic events
affect the legs much more often than the arms (ratio 5:1). Artery bifurca-
tions are affected most commonly.
Risk factors Diabetes, smoking, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia.
Past history Ask about previous transient ischaemic attack (TIA), stroke, MI.
Examination A clear demarcation between normal and ischaemic skin
suggests an embolic cause of an acutely ischaemic limb. Look for potential
sources of emboli (irregular pulse, abnormal heart sounds, murmurs,
valve clicks, etc.). Check all pulses in both the affected and contralateral
limbs. The presence of normal pulses in the contralateral limb suggests
an embolic cause, whereas absent contralateral pulses makes thrombosis
more likely (even if a potential embolic source exists).
Investigations ECG, CXR, U&E, CK, FBC, coagulation screen, ABG,
urinalysis (checking for myoglobin), cross-match. Cardiac and/or abdominal
USS may be required and if thrombosis in situ is suspected, angiography
indicated.
Thrombotic
Thrombosis may develop acutely at the site of atheromatous disease.
A previous history of intermittent claudication/vascular impairment is
likely. The other limb is also likely to have features of chronic vascular
insufﬁciency (muscle wasting, hair loss, ulceration).
Treatment
• Give appropriate pain relief (usually IV opioid).
• Correct hypovolaemia and other causes of low ﬂow states as necessary.
• Re-vascularization is required within 6hr to avoid permanent muscle
  necrosis (and subsequent need for amputation) and metabolic effects (such
  as rhabdomyolysis and renal failure). If the cause is embolic, embolectomy
  is required. If thrombotic, angiography will deﬁne the site and extent of the
  lesion: thrombolysis ± reconstructive surgery is then undertaken.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 11                      533

Ophthalmology

Approach to eye problems   534
Ophthalmological trauma    536
Corneal trauma             538
Contact lens problems      539
Sudden visual loss         540
The red eye                542
534    CHAPTER 11 Ophthalmology

      Approach to eye problems
      History
      Always take a full ophthalmic history. Which eye is affected (are both)?
      What is the disturbance? Are there ﬂashing lights or ﬂoaters? How quickly
      did the symptoms come on? How does it affect the patient’s lifestyle (job,
      reading, watching TV)? Ask about prior ophthalmic/optician treatment
      and take a full medical and drug history. Family history of glaucoma may
      also be relevant.
      Always measure visual acuity of patients presenting with eye problems.
      Patients with potentially serious pathology include those with:
      • Sudden visual loss.
      • Signiﬁcantly dVA.
      • Penetrating eye injuries.
      • Chemical burns of the eye (these require immediate treatment and
        specialist referral).
      Have a low threshold for involving an ophthalmologist if a patient who is
      already blind in one eye, presents with a problem with the ‘good eye’.
      Examination
      Visual acuity (VA) is the key to eye examination: measure this ﬁrst.
      Failure to document VA may constitute negligence
      Use a Snellen chart, read at 6m, for each eye separately. Allow patients
      to use glasses if available, if not employ a pinhole (made using a needle
      through a piece of card). Use of a pinhole eliminates refractive error.
      VA is expressed as:
      Distance from chart in m/no. of line on chart (normal vision is 6/6)
      For example, a patient whose VA is recorded as Right eye 6/5; Left eye
      6/60 can read the bottom line with the right eye, but only the top line with
      the left eye. If patients read additional letters of the line below, record
      using + number of extra letters (eg 6/12 + 2).
      Bring patients unable to read chart at 6m forward until they can read the
      chart (eg 3/60 = top line read at 3m). Very poor vision: try counting ﬁngers
      or detecting hand movement at 1m, or light perception.
      A hand-held chart at 30cm is an alternative if a full Snellen chart is
      unavailable—ability to read small print implies normal VA for that eye.
      For patients who are illiterate, there is an alternative chart with various
      different versions of the letter ‘E’—ask the patient to state which
      directions the 3 limbs of the letter point.
                                          APPROACH TO EYE PROBLEMS               535

Pupils Record pupil size, shape, direct, and consensual responses to light
and accommodation.
Eye movements Check full range and ask about diplopia. Look for
nystagmus.
Visual ﬁelds Check carefully in patients with visual loss.
Fundoscopy In a darkened room, ﬁrst note the presence of a red reﬂex.
A lost or dred reﬂex is an abnormal ﬁnding, typically caused by vitreous
haemorrhage, cataracts, or major corneal abrasions. Assess the optic
discs, look for retinal haemorrhages and vessel abnormalities.
Direct assessment Under a bright light look for inﬂammation or FBs.
Subtarsal examination If there is a possibility of FB, evert the upper eyelid
by pressing down lightly over the upper lid with a cotton bud or orange
stick and rotating the lid upwards over it. Ask the patient to look down
throughout.
Slit lamp examination Learn how to use a slit lamp. It allows a detailed
view of conjunctiva, cornea, and anterior chamber. Fluorescein staining
reveals corneal abnormalities, particularly when viewed under blue light,
when abrasions appear green. Fluorescein is available either in drop form
or dried onto a strip. Remember that ﬂuorescein can permanently stain
clothes and contact lenses.
Intraocular pressure Digital assessment is unreliable. Formal measurement
of intra-ocular pressure is useful, but requires training and is left to the
eye specialist in many departments.
Temporal arteries Palpate for tenderness if temporal arteritis is a
possibility.
LA drops to aid examination
Sometimes, blepharospasm prevents satisfactory examination. Consider
LA drops (1 or 2 drops of 1% amethocaine/tetracaine or 0.4% oxybupro-
caine. 0.5% proxymetacaine causes less stinging and is useful in children).
Never discharge patients with a supply of local anaesthetic drops.
Notes on ophthalmological treatments
Antibiotic ointment and drops Apply to the lower fornix (between
lower eyelid and sclera) then ask the patient to keep the eye shut for
1–2min. Ointment has the advantage over drops in that it lasts longer:
for example, chloramphenicol ointment needs to be given 4 times a day,
whereas drops need to be given every 2hr initially. Theoretical concerns
about aplastic anaemia are not well-founded (see the BNF).
Eye pads Previously recommended following the administration of LA
drops and for patients with corneal abrasions, they tend not to be useful
unless the pad seals the eyelid shut.
Driving Advise patients not to drive until their vision has returned to
normal (this particularly applies after use of mydriatic agents). In addition,
advise patients not to drive whilst wearing an eye pad. Document the
advice given in the notes.
536    CHAPTER 11 Ophthalmology

      Ophthalmological trauma
      Blunt eye injuries
      Blunt injury to the face may result in injury to the orbit or its bony margins.
      Compression of the eye in an antero-posterior direction (eg squash ball
      or ﬁst) can cause a ‘blow-out’ fracture of the ﬂoor of the orbit.
      Orbital compartment syndrome and blindness can arise from a retrobulbar
      haematoma. Unless diagnosed and treated as an emergency, optic nerve
      ischaemia develops and the patient can lose sight in the affected eye
      within a few hours. Proptosis, reduced eye movements, reduced visual
      acuity and pain all point to a retrobulbar haematoma. There may be an
      afferent pupillary defect.
      Assessment
      • Look for proptosis.
      • Check visual acuity.
      • Check pupillary reﬂexes.
      • Check for enophthalmos and dinfra-orbital nerve sensation, both found
        in a blowout fracture.
      • Document range of eye movements, looking in particular for entrapment
        of the extra-ocular muscles.
      • Look for a hyphaema (a horizontal ﬂuid level in the anterior chamber
        when the patient is upright). It can cause pain, photophobia, blurred
        vision and can iintra-ocular pressure, causing nausea and vomiting.
      • Stain the cornea and examine using slit lamp for corneal abrasions.
      • Ophthalmoscopic examination may reveal lens dislocation, hyphaema,
        vitreous, subhyaloid, or retinal haemorrhage. Sometimes retinal oedema
        (‘commotio retinae’) may be seen as white patches with diffuse margins
        on the posterior pole of the eye.
      X-ray if there is bony tenderness or clinical evidence of orbital or facial
      bone fracture.
      Treatment
      Any patient suspected of a retrobulbar haematoma requires an emergency
      lateral canthotomy. This should be performed by an ophthalmologist or
      a trained emergency physician, under local anaesthetic in the ED, and
      reduces the retro-orbital pressure.
      Nurse patients with obvious globe injury head up at 45°. Refer urgently.
      Provide prophylactic oral antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav) for uncomplicated
      facial or orbital fractures, and arrange for maxillofacial follow-up, with
      advice to avoid nose-blowing in the meantime.
                                        OPHTHALMOLOGICAL TRAUMA                537

Penetrating eye injuries
Suspect intraocular foreign body if there is a history of hammering or
work involving metal on metal. Find out if protective glasses were worn.
Ascertain whether a small foreign body travelling at speed may have pen-
etrated the orbit (eg during grinding, hammering, chiselling). Failure to
suspect and diagnose these injuries can have serious consequences.
Assessment
• Check visual acuity.
• Look for pupil irregularity.
• Look for puncture/entry wounds on both aspects of the eyelids, the
  cornea and sclera. Corneoscleral wounds are often situated inferiorly,
  due to upturning of the eyeball as the patient blinks.
• Examine the anterior chamber. There may be a shallow anterior
  chamber, air bubbles, a ﬂat cornea, deﬂated globe and a positive Seidel’s
  test (dilution of ﬂuorescein by aqueous humour leaking from the ante-
  rior chamber).
• Look for a hyphaema.
• Look for vitreous haemorrhage on fundoscopy.
X-ray all patients with possible globe penetration (consider also CT or USS)
Give analgesia, tetanus prophylaxis, IV antibiotics (eg 1.5g cefuroxime),
and refer all patients with penetrating eye injuries immediately to an
ophthalmologist, even if there are other major injuries needing attention
at the same time.
Never manipulate or try to remove embedded objects (eg darts).
538    CHAPTER 11 Ophthalmology

      Corneal trauma
      Conjunctival FB
      The typical history is of dust or grit blown into an eye by the wind. The FB
      usually gravitates into the lower fornix—remove with a cotton bud.
      Subtarsal FB
      FBs may not gravitate into the lower fornix, but may remain stuck under
      the upper eyelid. The patient reports pain on blinking. Fluorescein staining
      reveals characteristic vertical corneal abrasions (the cornea has been
      likened to an ‘ice rink’). Evert the upper eyelid and remove the FB with
      a cotton bud. Discharge with topical antibiotic (eg chloramphenicol oint-
      ment qds or fusidic acid eye drops).
      Corneal abrasions
      Often result from a newspaper or ﬁngernail in the eye. Irritation, photo-
      phobia, and lacrimation occur. Use LA drops and ﬂuorescein staining to
      examine the cornea. Exclude FB or penetrating injury. Prescribe regular
      antibiotic ointment (eg chloramphenicol) and oral analgesia. An eye patch
      which seals eyelids closed will aid the symptoms and recovery. If the patient
      is very uncomfortable, consider instilling a drop of 1% cyclopentolate to
      dilate the pupil (this reduces iris spasm) or a drop of 0.1% diclofenac.
      Advise the patient not to drive until vision has returned to normal. Advise
      also to return for review if symptoms continue beyond 36hr.
      Corneal foreign body
      Instill LA and attempt removal with a cotton bud. If unsuccessful, remove
      with a blue (23G) needle introduced from the side (ideally using a slit
      lamp). Ensure that the patient’s head is ﬁrmly ﬁxed and cannot move for-
      wards onto the needle: it can help for the operator’s hand to rest lightly
      on the patient’s cheek. After complete removal of the FB, check that the
      anterior chamber is intact, instill and prescribe antibiotic ointment, and
      advise the patient to return if symptomatic at 36hr. Refer patients with
      large, deep or incompletely removed FB, or if a rust ring remains.
      Arc (welder’s) eye/‘snowblindness’
      Exposure to ultraviolet light can cause superﬁcial keratitis. Climbers/skiers,
      welders, and sunbed users who have not used protective goggles develop
      pain, watering, and blepharospasm several hours later. LA drops allow
      examination with ﬂuorescein staining, revealing multiple punctate corneal
      lesions. Consider instilling a drop of 1% cyclopentolate or 0.1% diclofenac
      into both eyes. Discharge with an eye pad, oral analgesia, and advice
      not to drive until recovered. Anticipate resolution within 24hr. Do not
      discharge with LA drops.
      Chemical eye burns
      Chemical burns from alkali or acid are serious. Triage urgently ahead,
      check Toxbase and provide immediate eye irrigation with lukewarm
      normal saline for at least 20min, or until the pH of tears has returned to
      normal (7.4). A 1L bag of 0.9% saline with standard IV tubing is ideal. LA
      may be needed to enable full irrigation. Identify the substance involved
      and contact Poisons Unit. Refer alkali and acid burns immediately.
      Superglued eyelids
      Wash with warm water. The eye will open within 4 days. If the patient
      reports a FB sensation, this may represent a lump of glue, which may
      cause an abrasion if left untreated: refer to the ophthalmologist.
                                           CONTACT LENS PROBLEMS              539

Contact lens problems
Contact lenses are of two basic types: hard or soft. Soft lenses, composed
of hydrogels, are more comfortable to wear. Avoid using ﬂuorescein with
contact lenses, as permanent staining may occur.
‘Stuck lens’
Most contact lens users are adept at removing their contact lenses. New
users, however, not infrequently experience difﬁculty in their removal.
Moisten soft lenses with saline, then remove by pinching between ﬁnger
and thumb. Special suction devices are available to help remove hard
lenses.
‘Lost lens’
Patients may present concerned that they are unable to ﬁnd their contact
lens and cannot remember it falling out. Check under both eyelids
carefully (evert the upper lid if the lens is not immediately apparent) and
remove the offending lens, if present.
Hypersensitivity and overuse
Preservatives in lens cleaning ﬂuid cause itching and may evoke a reaction.
Advise to stop using the lenses, give local antibiotic ointment and arrange
ophthalmological follow-up.
Acanthamoeba keratitis
This is a protozoal infection of the cornea which occurs in contact lens
users, associated with poor lens hygiene or swimming whilst wearing
contact lenses. The eye becomes painful and red. Corneal oedema
and ulceration develops. If acanthamoeba infection is suspected, refer
immediately for ophthalmological care.
Other problems
Treat and refer conjunctivitis, corneal abrasions, or ulcers apparently
related to contact lenses as outlined opposite. Advise avoidance of use of
both contact lenses until the problem has resolved.
540    CHAPTER 11 Ophthalmology

      Sudden visual loss
      Sudden visual loss requires emergency assessment and treatment.
      Amaurosis fugax
      The patient describes temporary loss of vision in one eye, like a ‘curtain
      coming down’, with complete recovery after a few seconds to minutes.
      The cause is usually a thrombotic embolus in the retinal, ophthalmic,
      or ciliary artery, originating from a carotid atheromatous plaque. Refer
      urgently to the ophthalmology team.
      Central retinal artery occlusion
      The central retinal artery is an end artery. Occlusion is usually embolic
      (check for atrial ﬁbrillation and listen for carotid bruits), causing sudden
      painless dVA to counting ﬁngers or no light perception. The patient may
      have a history of amaurosis fugax. Direct pupil reaction is sluggish or
      absent in the affected eye, but it reacts to consensual stimulation (afferent
      pupillary defect). Fundoscopy reveals a pale retina, with a swollen pale
      optic disc and ‘cherry red macula spot’ (the retina is thinnest here and
      the underlying choroidal circulation is normal). Retinal blood vessels are
      attenuated and irregular: there may be ‘cattle-trucking’ in arteries.
      Treat by digitally massaging the globe for 5–15sec then release and
      repeat to dislodge the embolus, whilst awaiting the urgent arrival of an
      ophthalmologist.
      If there is any delay in the patient being seen by the ophthalmologist,
      consider (and discuss) the following options:
      • Giving sublingual glyceryl trinitrate (GTN).
      • Giving IV 500mg acetazolamide (to dintra-ocular pressure).
      • Reconsider the diagnosis. In particular, consider whether or not tempo-
         ral arteritis is a possibility: ask about jaw claudication, headaches, scalp
         tenderness.
      Central retinal vein occlusion
      This is a more frequent cause of sudden painless visual loss than arterial
      occlusion. Predisposing factors include: old age, chronic glaucoma, arte-
      riosclerosis, hypertension, polycythaemia. Examination reveals dVA, often
      with an afferent pupillary defect. Fundoscopy reveals a ‘stormy sunset’
      appearance: hyperaemia with engorged veins and adjacent ﬂame-shaped
      haemorrhages. The disc may be obscured by haemorrhages and oedema.
      Cotton wool spots may be seen. Although the outcome is variable and
      there is no speciﬁc treatment, refer urgently as the underlying cause may
      be treatable, thus protecting the other eye.
                                                   SUDDEN VISUAL LOSS           541

Temporal (giant cell) arteritis
Inﬂammation of the posterior ciliary arteries causes ischaemic optic neu-
ritis and visual loss. It is relatively common in those aged >50 years and
is associated with polymyalgia rheumatica. The other eye remains at risk
until treatment is commenced. Rapid and profound visual loss may be pre-
ceded by headaches, jaw claudication, general malaise, and muscular pains.
The temporal arteries are characteristically tender to palpation. Retinal
appearances have been termed ‘pale papilloedema’: the ischaemic disc is
pale, waxy, elevated and has splinter haemorrhages on it. If suspected, give
200mg IV hydrocortisone immediately, check erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) (typically >>40mm/hr, but can be normal) and refer urgently.
Vitreous haemorrhage
Occurs in diabetics with new vessel formation, in bleeding disorders and
in retinal detachment. Small bleeds may produce vitreous ﬂoaters with
little visual loss. Large bleeds result in painless ddVA, an absent red reﬂex
and difﬁculty visualizing the retina. Refer urgently. Meanwhile, elevate the
head of the bed to allow blood to collect inferiorly.
Retinal detachment
Occurs in myopes, diabetics, the elderly and following trauma. The rate
of onset is variable: patients may report premonitory ﬂashing lights or a
‘snow-storm’, before developing cloudy vision. There may be a visual ﬁeld
defect. Macular involvement causes dVA. The affected retina is dark and
opalescent, but may be difﬁcult to visualize by standard ophthalmoscopy.
Refer urgently for surgery and re-attachment.
Optic neuritis
Usually presents in a young woman. Optic nerve inﬂammation causes
visual loss over a few days. Pain on eye movement may occur. An afferent
pupillary defect is associated with dVA, dcolour vision (colour red looks
faded) and normal/swollen optic disc. Most recover untreated, later some
develop multiple sclerosis. Refer to the ophthalmologist.
Other causes
Patients with chronic visual loss due to a variety of conditions may present
acutely (senile macular degeneration, glaucoma, optic atrophy, cataract,
choroidoretinitis). Drugs which can cause painless visual loss include
methanol (b p.202) and quinine (in overdose). Refer immediately all
patients in whom an acute visual loss cannot be excluded.
542    CHAPTER 11 Ophthalmology

      The red eye
      Patients commonly present with a red eye with no history of trauma, but
      it is critical not to miss certain diagnoses. Refer all patients with new ﬁnd-
      ings of dVA, abnormal pupil reactions, or corneal abnormalities.
      Orbital and preseptal cellulitis
      This is a major infection of the orbital tissues. The infection is most fre-
      quently spread from the paranasal sinuses (ethmoid sinusitis), facial skin or
      lacrimal sac. Occasionally, the infection follows direct trauma to the orbit
      or from haematogenous spread. Patients present with fever, eyelid swelling,
      erythema, and proptosis. Always assess patient for signs of severe sepsis
      (b Severe sepsis and shock, p.59) and resuscitate as necessary. Obtain
      venous access, take blood for cultures, commence intravenous antibi-
      otics (eg co-amoxiclav) and ﬂuids. Refer urgently to the ophthalmologist.
      Some aggressive infections may require surgical treatment. Cavernous
      sinus thrombosis and meningitis are potential complications.
      Acute iritis (acute uveitis)
      A relapsing condition of the young and middle-aged associated with anky-
      losing spondylitis, ulcerative colitis, sarcoid, AIDS, and Behçet’s syndrome.
      Symptoms include Acute onset pain, photophobia, ‘ﬂoaters’, blurred
      vision and watering.
      Signs dVA, tender eye felt through the upper eyelid, circumcorneal
      erythema, small pupil (may be irregular due to previous adhesions).
      Shining a light into the ‘good’ eye causes pain in the other. Pain i as eyes
      converge and pupils react to accommodation (Talbot’s test). Slit lamp
      may reveal hypopyon and white precipitates on the posterior cornea.
      Refer urgently to the ophthalmologist for steroid eye drops, pupil
      dilatation, analgesia, investigation, and follow-up.
      Acute closed angle glaucoma
      Long-sighted middle-aged or elderly with shallow anterior chambers
      are at risk. Sudden blocked drainage of aqueous humor into the canal of
      Schlemm causes intra-ocular pressure to increase from 10–20mmHg up to
      70mmHg. This may be caused by anticholinergic drugs or pupil dilatation
      at night (reading in dim light).
      Symptoms include preceding episodes of blurred vision or haloes around
      lights due to corneal oedema. Acute blockage causes severe eye pain,
      nausea/vomiting.
      Signs dVA, hazy oedematous cornea with circumcorneal erythema and a
      ﬁxed semi-dilated ovoid pupil. The eye feels tender and hard through the
      upper eyelid. Measure intraocular pressure if this facility is available.
      Treatment Instill a 4% pilocarpine drop every 15min to produce ciliary
      muscle contraction and aqueous humor drainage. Apply prophylactic 1%
      pilocarpine drops into the other eye also. Give analgesia (eg morphine IV
      with anti-emetic). Arrange an emergency ophthalmology opinion: consider
      giving acetazolamide 500mg IV (to dintra-ocular pressure) meantime and/
      or mannitol 20% up to 500mL intravenous infusion over 1hr.
                                                            THE RED EYE        543

Conjunctivitis
Caused by bacteria (Strep. pneumoniae or H. inﬂuenza), viruses (adeno-
virus), or allergy. The sensation of a FB may involve both eyes. The con-
junctiva is red and inﬂamed, sometimes with eyelid swelling. VA and pupils
are normal. Bacterial infection classically produces sticky mucopurulent
tears, viral infection copious watery tears (associated with photophobia
and pre-auricular lymphadenopathy in the highly contagious adenoviral
‘epidemic keratoconjunctivitis’). Prescribe antibiotic eye drops or oint-
ment (eg fusidic acid, chloramphenicol, or gentamicin) regularly for 5 days.
Advise not to share towels or pillows. Most cases settle relatively quickly:
advise patients to return if symptoms do not improve within 4 days.
Ulcerative keratitis
Corneal ulceration causes pain with photophobia. It is apparent on
ﬂuorescein staining under a slit lamp.
• Hypopyon (pus in the anterior chamber) implies bacterial infection.
• Vesicles in the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve occur with
  herpes zoster infection.
• A dendritic branching ulcerative pattern suggests herpes simplex.
  If this is misdiagnosed and steroid eye drops given, ulceration can
  be disastrous. As a non-specialist, do not prescribe steroid eye
  drops—leave this to the ophthalmologist.
Whatever the infective agent, refer corneal ulceration immediately.
Episcleritis
Inﬂammation beneath one area of the conjunctiva is usually associated
with a nodule and a dull aching discomfort. VA, pupils, and anterior
chamber are normal. Prescribe oral NSAIDs and advise outpatient follow-
up to consider steroid eye drops if there is no resolution.
Blepharitis
This chronic problem is quite common. Eyelashes are matted together
and itchy. Ensure that there is no associated corneal ulceration, provide
topical antibiotics (eg chloramphenicol) and refer for GP follow-up.
External hordeolum (stye)
Treat staphylococcal infections of eyelash roots with antibiotics drops.
Internal hordeolum (chalazion)
A chalazion is an inﬂammatory reaction in a blocked meibomian gland,
which may become secondarily infected. Treat infected tarsal (meibomian)
glands with topical antibiotics (eg chloramphenicol) together with oral
antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav). Refer patients who develop an abscess or
nodule affecting vision.
Dacrocystitis
Acute infection of the lacrimal sac may follow nasolacrimal duct
obstruction. Treat early infections with oral antibiotics (co-amoxiclav);
later, refer for drainage.
Subconjunctival haemorrhage
This usually presents as a painless, well-deﬁned area of haemorrhage
over the sclera. May result from vomiting or sneezing. Following trauma,
consider orbital or base of skull fracture and treat accordingly.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 12                                  545

Ear, nose and throat

Ear, nose, and throat foreign bodies   546
Ear examination                        548
Vertigo                                549
Cochlear implants                      549
Earache                                550
Epistaxis                              552
Nasal fracture                         553
Sore throat                            554
Facial nerve palsy                     556
Salivary gland problems                557
Dental emergencies                     558
546    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Ear, nose, and throat foreign bodies
      Ear foreign bodies
      All sorts of FBs may become lodged in the external auditory canal,
      including insects, vegetable matter, and various inert objects. The patient
      may present with pain, deafness, discharge or, in the case of live insects, an
      irritating buzzing in one ear.
      Diagnosis depends upon direct visualization with the auriscope. In children,
      remember that, as with FBs elsewhere, there may be no history of FB
      available.
      Removal
      • Many FBs can be removed under direct vision with hooks. Manipulate
        gently to avoid causing damage or further impaction.
      • Drown live insects in 2% lidocaine ﬁrst.
      • Do not try to syringe out vegetable matter with water, as this may cause
        swelling and pain.
      • If there is some difﬁculty (eg ball bearing or bead in an uncooperative
        child), refer to ear, nose, and throat (ENT) department to consider
        removal under GA. Removal of beads using an orange stick with a tiny
        amount of superglue on the end has been described, but carries some
        obvious dangers and requires complete patient co-operation.
      Embedded ear-rings The ‘butterﬂy’ piece of an ear ring may become
      embedded in the posterior part of the ear lobe, causing inﬂammation or
      infection. The ear-rings are usually easily removed once adequate analgesia
      has been established: render the ear anaesthetized with a greater auricular
      nerve block (b Nerve blocks of forehead and ear, p.300), or directly
      inﬁltrate local anaesthetic into the lobe, remembering that this is a highly
      sensitive area. The butterﬂy is released by applying pressure in a posterior
      direction. Occasionally, forceps and a small posterior skin incision may be
      required to open up the track. If there is evidence of infection, prescribe
      antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav) and arrange GP follow-up. Advise the patient
      not to wear ear-rings until the symptoms have settled.
      Nasal foreign bodies
      Usually affects children, who present with offensive unilateral nasal discharge.
      Also occurs in adults with psychotic illness or learning disabilities.
      Removal Remove easily accessible, anterior nasal FBs in ED. However,
      there is a risk of aspiration with any nasal FB, particularly in uncooperative
      patients. Refer such patients to an ENT surgeon for removal with airway
      protection. Instruct the patient to blow their nose whilst occluding the
      unaffected nostril. If unsuccessful, consider attempting removal with a
      nasal speculum, hook, and forceps, as appropriate. A ﬁne bore tracheal
      suction catheter attached to wall suction can also work. One technique
      which has been reported in cooperative children is to ask a parent to
      blow into the child’s mouth (‘parent’s kiss’), having ﬁrst ensured a good
      seal and also occluded the normal nostril.
      Nasal button, batteries, or magnets (b p.213) can cause signiﬁcant damage,
      so refer to ENT.
                          EAR, NOSE, AND THROAT FOREIGN BODIES                   547

Inhaled foreign bodies
Aspiration causing complete upper airway obstruction is an emergency,
requiring immediate intervention (b p.324). FBs lodged in the larynx or
tracheobronchial tree cause persistent coughing. There may not be a clear
history—a coughing/spluttering episode in a child should arouse suspicion
of an inhaled FB. Auscultation of the chest is often normal, but may reveal
wheezes or localized absence of breath sounds.
CXR may be normal or show a radio-opaque FB with distal consolidation
or hyperinﬂation (FB acting as a ball valve). A CXR in expiration may
show this more clearly. Refer to a cardiothoracic surgeon.
Ingested foreign bodies
Various FBs, both radio-opaque (eg coins, rings) and non-radio-opaque
(eg plastic pen tops, aluminium ring pulls) are frequently swallowed by
children and by adults with psychiatric disorders. Provided the FB reaches
the stomach, it is likely to pass through the remainder of the gastroin-
testinal tract without incident. An exception is button battery ingestion
(b p.213). For radio-opaque FBs, conﬁrm with lateral neck X-ray and
CXR that it is not impacted in the oesophagus. A metal detector may
conﬁrm a swallowed coin has reached the stomach. Refer patients who
are symptomatic, have impacted FBs, or who have swallowed potentially
dangerous items (button batteries, razor blades, open safety pins). Note
that magnets can be dangerous if two or more are ingested, since they can
attract each other through tissues and cause pressure necrosis/perforation
of bowel. Only discharge patients who are asymptomatic (with advice
to return if they develop abdominal pain and/or vomiting), and arrange
suitable follow-up. Unless the ingested FB is valuable or of great sentimental
value, examination of the stools by the patient for the FB is unnecessary.
It may take weeks to pass.
Impacted ﬁsh bones
Fish bones often become stuck in the pharynx or oesophagus. Direct visu-
alization with a good light (a head torch can be useful) and wooden spatula
acting as tongue depressor may reveal ﬁsh bones lodged in the tonsils or
base of the tongue—remove with Tilley’s forceps. If no FB is seen, obtain
soft-tissue lateral neck X-rays (look for prevertebral soft tissue swelling
and ﬁsh bone, bearing in mind not all are radio-opaque), then refer to
ENT for endoscopy. Depending on local policy, the ENT team may decide
to see the patient immediately, or (provided the patient can swallow) the
following day (in which case discuss the need for prophylactic antibiotics).
A ﬁsh bone can scratch the pharynx causing sensation of a FB to persist
after it has gone.
Oesophageal food bolus obstruction
Usually involves a lump of meat. Patients with complete obstruction
present unable to swallow solids or liquids (including their own saliva).
There may be retrosternal discomfort. Refer to the surgical team for
endoscopy. Glucagon (1mg IV) relieves some episodes of food bolus
obstruction, but endoscopy is still advisable to look for oesophageal
stenosis or malignancy.
548    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Ear examination
      Scope of the examination
      Full ear examination includes assessment of the vestibulocochlear nerve
      and auroscope examination. Check for mastoid or pinna tenderness.
      Look at the external ear canal for discharge, or swelling and examine
      the tympanic membrane for colour, translucency, bulging, and the cone
      of light.
      Assessing hearing
      Hearing can be assessed by asking the patient to place one ﬁnger in their
      ear. Stand a foot behind the patient’s unoccluded ear and whisper a two
      syllable word. Ask the patient to repeat the word.
      Weber’s and Rinne’s tests
      Weber’s test—strike a 512Hz tuning fork and place in the centre of the
      forehead. In conductive deafness, the sound localizes to the deaf ear, with
      sensorineural deafness, the sound localizes to the good ear.
      Rinne’s test—strike a 512Hz tuning fork and place it on the mastoid
      process. Ask the patient to tell you when they no longer hear the sound,
      then immediately place in front of the auditory meatus. In a normal ear, air
      conduction is heard for twice as long as bone conduction. In conductive
      deafness, bone conduction is heard for longer than air conduction.
      In sensorineural deafness, air conduction is heard longer than bone
      conduction.
      Nystagmus
      To complete assessment of the vestibulocochlear nerve, examine for
      nystagmus. All forms of nystagmus can be associated with intracranial
      lesions, as well as peripheral causes; however, downbeat and upbeat nys-
      tagmus in particular, signify a central cause. Tinnitus or deafness tends to
      suggest a peripheral cause. Peripheral nystagmus is exacerbated by gazing
      towards the side of the fast phase (Alexander’s Law). Central nystagmus
      may change direction, depending on the side of gaze.
                                                  COCHLEAR IMPLANTS             549

Vertigo
Vertigo is the impression or illusion of movement when there is none.
Take care to distinguish vertigo from the more general term of ‘dizziness’,
which is often used to describe a feeling of light-headedness.
Causes
• Benign positional vertigo. Diagnosed with Hallpike’s test which induces
  positional vertigo. Mostly caused by posterior semicircular canal cana-
  lithiasis. Medications are ineffective.
• Menière’s disease: a disorder of the inner ear. Patients have recurrent
  vertigo, tinnitus and deafness and should be managed by ENT.
• Acute labyrinthitis: Caused by reactivation of herpes simplex virus.
  Some have an upper respiratory tract prodrome. Some individuals are
  unable to work or perform normal daily duties because of vertigo and
  vomiting.
• Otitis media.
• Acoustic neuroma (or vestibular schwannoma). This presents with slow
  onset deafness and tinnitus. Dizziness is less common.
• Cholesteatoma.
• Stroke or transient ischaemic attack.
• Trauma.
• Wax or FB in the ear.
Take a careful history and examine for causes of vertigo. Manage patients
who present with vertigo according to the underlying cause. The
cause may be unclear, in which case refer to the medical/ENT team as
appropriate.

Cochlear implants
Cochlear implants consist of an implanted radio receiver and decoder
package containing a magnet (above and behind the ear), together with a
removable external microphone/radio transmitter. X-rays and CT do not
damage this device, provided that the external microphone/transmitter is
ﬁrst removed and switched off. MRI can cause signiﬁcant damage to the
device and the patient. If there are concerns relating to a cochlear implant,
refer to ENT. In particular, refer patients with:
• Signiﬁcant direct trauma, including exposure by a scalp wound.
• Suspected otitis media of the implanted ear.
550    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Earache
      Otitis externa
      Often caused by Pseudomonas, Staph. aureus, Strep. pneumoniae, E. coli.
      Common in swimmers/surfers and after minor trauma. This causes intense
      itching and pain, which gradually increases. Discharge and hearing loss may
      be present (profuse discharge implies middle ear disease). On examina-
      tion, the external canal is inﬂamed and oedematous. Oedema and debris
      may obscure the tympanic membrane. Pain is induced by pressing on the
      tragus or pulling the pinna.
      Management Prescribe topical antibiotics and topical steroids, advise
      against swimming, and arrange GP follow-up. In severe cases (eg if the
      drum is not visible), refer to an ENT surgeon for aural toilet to remove
      debris from the auditory canal.
      Cellulitis or furunculosis of the ear canal
      Cellulitis of the ear canal may be caused by scratching or by infection of
      hair follicles (furunculosis). Staph. aureus is the usual organism. Itching
      and a feeling of pressure are followed by pain in the ear, with deafness
      if the ear canal is occluded by swelling. Examination shows swelling and
      inﬂammation of the ear canal, with tenderness over the tragus and pain on
      movement of the ear.
      Treat with analgesia (eg NSAID) and antibiotics (eg ﬂucloxacillin 500mg
      PO qds for 5 days). Arrange follow-up by a GP (or ENT in severe cases).
      Acute otitis media
      Most common in children aged 3–6 years and may follow an upper respi-
      ratory tract infection. Commonest pathogens are Strep. pneumoniae and
      H. inﬂuenzae.
      Presentation Earache may be accompanied by fever, deafness, irritability
      and lethargy. Typically, hearing loss precedes pain. Examination of the
      tympanic membrane shows evidence of inﬂammation with loss of the light
      reﬂex and bulging of the drum. Eventual perforation results in purulent
      discharge with some relief of pain. Look for associated swelling/tenderness
      over the mastoid—this implies secondary mastoiditis (see below).
      Treatment Prescribe oral analgesia. The use of antibiotics remains
      very controversial. Oral antibiotics (eg 5-day course of amoxicillin or
      clarithromycin) are of questionable value, but are frequently given.
      Consider oral antibiotics if no improvement within 72hr, or earlier if
      there is deterioration or perforation. If perforation has occurred (often
      heralded by a sudden i pain), arrange ENT follow-up and advise not to
      swim. Otherwise, arrange GP follow-up.
      Acute mastoiditis
      This is an uncommon, but important diagnosis to make, because of the
      risk of intracranial spread of infection. Mastoiditis follows an episode of
      acute otitis media—consider it if there is no response to therapy (eg dis-
      charging ear for >10 days). Suspect it if there is pain, redness, swelling or
      tenderness over the mastoid process. The pinna may be pushed forwards/
      outwards—swelling may mean that the drum is not visible. Refer urgently
      to the ENT surgeon for admission and IV antibiotics.
                                                                EARACHE         551

Cholesteatoma
This erosive condition affects the middle ear and mastoid. A cholest-
eatoma can result in life-threatening intracranial infection. There may be
an offensive discharge, with conductive hearing loss, vertigo or facial nerve
palsy. Tympanic membrane examination shows granulation tissue and/or
perforation with white debris. Refer to the ENT surgeon.
Traumatic tympanic membrane rupture
This may result from direct penetrating injury, blast injury (b p.389)
or basal skull fracture (b p.361). Pain is associated with d hearing.
Perforation is visible on examination.
Treatment Most heal spontaneously with conservative measures and advice
to keep out of water. Arrange ENT follow-up and give prophylactic oral
antibiotics according to local policy. Note that gentamicin or neomycin
eardrops may cause sensorineural deafness because of ototoxicity when
the tympanic membrane is ruptured.
Barotrauma
Sudden changes in atmospheric pressure with a blocked Eustachian tube
can result in pain and hearing loss. This usually affects aircraft passengers
and divers, especially if they have a cold (viral upper respiratory tract
infection). Pain is often relieved by the Valsalva manoeuvre (breathing out
with the mouth closed, while pinching the nose). Decongestant nasal spray
may help if the problem does not resolve spontaneously. Give analgesia
(NSAID). Arrange ENT follow-up if the pain persists.
552    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Epistaxis
      Nasal bleeding may be idiopathic or follow minor trauma (eg nose picking).
      When it occurs in patients with hypertension and coagulation disorders
      haemorrhage can be severe with signiﬁcant mortality. Epistaxis may follow
      isolated nasal fracture and more major facial injury.
      Site of bleeding
      Most nasal bleeding is from the anterior nasal septum in or close to Little’s
      area. A few patients have posterior nasal bleeding, which may be brisk.
      Equipment
      Direct visualization of the anterior nasal cavity is aided by a headlamp
      (eg battery-operated head torch), ﬁne soft suction catheter, and nasal
      speculum. Wear goggles to avoid blood splashes in the eyes.
      Initial approach
      Associated facial injury Assess ABC (especially pulse and BP) and resuscitate
      as necessary. Treat hypovolaemia vigorously.
      No associated injury Check airway patency, pulse, and BP. Treat
      hypovolaemia aggressively. Check coagulation status of patients on
      anticoagulants and treat appropriately (b p.170). Sit the patient up and
      instruct them to compress the ﬂeshy part of their nose between ﬁnger
      and thumb for 10min. If this stops the bleeding, the patient may be
      discharged after 30min observation.
      Continuing bleeding after pressure
      Adults Apply a cotton wool pledget soaked in 4% lidocaine with 1 in 1000
      adrenaline. Then, with a headlamp and nasal speculum, try to identify the
      bleeding point. Treat small anterior bleeding points with cautious cautery
      by applying a silver nitrate stick for 10–15sec. Avoid excessive cautery and
      never cauterize both sides of the septum—this may cause septal necrosis. If
      cautery stops the bleeding, observe for 15min, and discharge with GP follow-
      up. Advise avoidance of snifﬁng, picking or blowing the nose meantime.
      Children Applying nasal antiseptic cream (eg Naseptin®) is as effective as
      cautery in stopping bleeding. The cream is relatively easy to apply.
      Continuing bleeding despite cautery
      Insert a nasal pack. A specialized compressed surgical sponge nasal tampon
      (eg Merocel® or Rapid Rhino) is ideal: gently insert a lubricated tampon
      (horizontally) and ‘inﬂate’ with a 10mL syringe of saline. Alternatively, pack
      the nose in a traditional way with 1.25cm wide ribbon gauze soaked in oily
      paste (eg bismuth iodoform parafﬁn paste). Once packing has stopped the
      bleeding, refer to ENT for admission: observation is advisable (especially
      in the elderly). The pack may dislodge and obstruct the airway.
      Continuing bleeding despite packing
      Refer to the ENT surgeon. The bleeding site is likely to be posterior and can
      cause hypovolaemic shock. In this situation, insert 2 large bore venous cannulae,
      send blood for FBC, coagulation screen, cross-matching, and commence an IVI.
      Posterior nasal bleeding usually responds to tamponade with a Foley
      catheter. Remove the nasal tampon and insert a lubricated, uninﬂated
      Foley catheter through the bleeding nostril into the nasopharynx. Inﬂate
      the balloon with air and gently withdraw the catheter, thus tamponading
      the bleeding site. Secure the catheter to the cheek with tape, and then
      re-insert the anterior nasal tampon.
                                                         NASAL FRACTURE            553

Nasal fracture
The prominent exposed position of the nose, combined with the delicacy
of its bones, render it relatively prone to injury.
Remember that the nose is part of the head, so nose injury = head injury
(and potentially cervical spine injury also).
History
The nose is commonly broken by a direct blow (eg from a punch) or
following a fall onto the face. Nasal fracture is usually accompanied by
bleeding. Search for a history of associated facial/head injury (diplopia, loss
of consciousness, etc.).
Examination
This is a clinical diagnosis based upon a history of injury with nasal swelling
and tenderness. Having made the diagnosis, assess whether there is nasal
deviation: it is useful to ask the patient to look in a mirror. Check and
record whether the patient can breathe through each nostril. Look for
an associated septal haematoma—this will appear as a smooth bulging
swelling, which may obstruct the nasal passage. Children are at particular
risk of septal haematoma, which predisposes to secondary infection and
septal necrosis.
Assess for additional injuries to the head or face (eg tender mandible,
diplopia, tender maxilla). Injury to the bridge of the nose may result in
persistent epistaxis and/or cerebrospinal ﬂuid rhinorrhoea.
Investigation
Do not X-ray to diagnose a nasal fracture—the diagnosis is a clinical one.
Obtain appropriate X-rays (eg orthopantomogram (OPG) or facial views)
if there is clinical suspicion of other bony injuries. Nasal fractures are often
apparent on facial X-rays or CT scans.
Treatment
• Resuscitate and treat for associated head injury.
• Continuing nasal haemorrhage is uncommon—refer to an ENT surgeon
  to consider urgent manipulation under anaesthetic (MUA) to stop the
  bleeding: meanwhile, insert a nasal tampon.
• Refer urgently to an ENT surgeon if there is a septal haematoma—this
  will require incision and drainage in order to prevent septal necrosis.
• Clean and close overlying skin wounds: steristrips often allow good skin
  apposition. If there is signiﬁcant contamination of the wound, start a
  course of prophylactic oral antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav: one tablet PO
  tds for 5 days).
• Provide oral analgesia (eg ibuprofen 400mg PO tds).
• If the nose is deviated/distorted, or if there is too much swelling to
  judge, arrange for ENT follow-up at 5–7 days, so that MUA may be
  performed within 10 days. It is particularly important to ensure accurate
  reduction of fractures in children.
• Discharge with head injury instructions to the care of a relative.
554    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Sore throat
      Tonsillitis
      Causes Acute pharyngo-tonsillitis may result from infection with a variety
      of viruses or bacteria:
      • Viral: Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), herpes simplex virus, adenoviruses.
      • Bacterial: group A B-haemolytic streptococcus (most common bacterial
        cause), mycoplasma, Corynebacterium diphtheriae.
      Features Sore throat is frequently accompanied by fever, headache,
      and mild dysphagia. Inspection of the tonsils reveals inﬂammation—the
      presence of pus on the tonsils suggests bacterial infection. Enlarged
      cervical lymph nodes are found in a variety of infections, but generalized
      lymphadenopathy (sometimes also with splenomegaly) is indicative of
      glandular fever (infectious mononucleosis—see b p.241).
      Diagnosis Despite the clinical pointers described above, it is usually
      impossible to distinguish clinically bacterial from viral causes.
      Investigation Consider throat swabs and anti-streptolysin titre in severe
      cases. If glandular fever is suspected, send blood for FBC and Paul–Bunnell
      (or Monospot) test.
      Treatment Unless contraindicated, give paracetamol (1g PO qds PRN) or
      ibuprofen (400mg PO tds PRN) and discharge to GP. Although frequently
      prescribed, oral antibiotics are rarely of beneﬁt: a sensible approach is to
      limit their use for patients with any of the following: a history of valvular
      heart disease, immunosupression, diabetes, marked systemic upset,
      peritonsillar cellulitis, known B–haemolytic streptococci. In this case,
      prescribe penicillin 500mg PO qds for 5 days (or clarithromycin 500mg PO
      bd for 5 days if allergic). Avoid ampicillin, amoxicillin, and co-amoxiclav,
      which cause a rash in patients infected with EBV.
      Occasionally, patients with acute tonsillitis may be unable to swallow
      ﬂuids (this is more commonly a feature of peritonsillar or retropharyngeal
      abscess). In this case, refer for IV antibiotics and IV ﬂuids.
      Complications Otitis media, sinusitis, retropharyngeal abscess, peritonsillar
      abscess.
      Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy)
      Typically, preceded by a sore throat for several days, the development of
      a peritonsillar abscess is heralded by high fever, pain localized to one side
      of the throat, and pain on swallowing. Difﬁculty swallowing can result in
      drooling. Trismus may make inspection difﬁcult, but if visualized there is
      tense bulging tonsil, pushing the uvula away from the affected side. Group
      A B-haemolytic streptococci are frequently implicated.
      Treatment Insert an IV cannula and give IV benzyl penicillin 1.2g
      (clarithromycin 500mg if allergic to penicillin), and refer immediately to an
      ENT surgeon for aspiration or formal drainage.
                                                          SORE THROAT          555

Retropharyngeal abscess
Spread of infection from adjacent lymph nodes may occasionally cause a
retropharyngeal abscess, particularly in children aged <3 years.
It is characterized by a sore throat, difﬁculty swallowing, fever, and
dehydration. In children, cough is typically absent from the history (unlike
in croup and other viral causes of upper airway obstruction). There
may be evidence of airway compromise (stridor, neck hyperextension,
signs of hypoxia). The differential diagnosis includes acute epiglottitis
(b p.677). Lateral X-rays of the neck show soft tissue swelling (obtain
these in the resuscitation room, rather than moving the patient to the
X-ray department).
Treatment Get senior ED, ENT, and anaesthetic help. If the patient is a
child with evidence of respiratory distress, do not upset them further.
Airway obstruction may be precipitated by examination of the throat, so
avoid this until appropriate staff and equipment are ready to cope with
airway problems. The child can sit on mum’s knee in the resuscitation
room. On suspicion of a retropharyngeal abscess in an adult, insert an IV
cannula, take bloods and blood cultures, give IV ﬂuids and IV co-amoxiclav
1.2g, and refer immediately to an ENT surgeon.
Pharyngeal burns after cocaine use
Smoking cocaine can result in dangerous burns of the throat, since the
drug acts as a local anaesthetic. Swelling of the epiglottis may result in
airway obstruction.
Paranasal sinusitis
Bacterial infection may result from direct spread from infected tooth roots
or (more usually) be secondary to viral upper respiratory tract infection
(URTI).
Clinical features
• Clear nasal discharge becoming purulent.
• Pain in (and often also tenderness over) the affected sinus.
• Fever.
• Headache and/or toothache.
Management
Provide analgesia. Despite a lack of convincing evidence, oral antibiotics
(eg amoxicillin, doxycycline or erythromycin) and nasal decongestant
(eg 1% ephedrine) are commonly given. Advise GP follow-up. In severe
cases, refer to ENT.
556    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Facial nerve palsy
      The facial (VII) nerve supplies the muscles of facial expression. Clinical
      examination reveals whether facial nerve palsy is of upper motor neurone
      or lower motor neurone type.
      Upper motor neurone paralysis is usually due to a stroke (b p.144),
      resulting in unilateral facial muscle weakness, but with sparing of the
      muscles of the forehead. If stroke is the cause, there may be additional
      evidence elsewhere (eg hemiparesis affecting the limbs).
      Lower motor neurone paralysis of the facial nerve results in weakness
      of the muscles of one side of the face. The facial nerve arises from its
      nucleus in the pons, emerges from the pons to travel past the cerebello-
      pontine angle, through the petrous part of the temporal bone, to emerge
      from the stylomastoid foramen and thence into the parotid gland, where
      it divides into branches. During its passage through the petrous temporal
      bone, the facial nerve is accompanied by the chorda tympani (carrying
      taste ﬁbres from the anterior 2/3 of one half of the tongue) and gives off
      the nerve to stapedius. Lesions of the facial nerve in the temporal bone
      therefore produce loss of taste and hyperacusis (noise is distorted and
      sounds loud) on the affected side.
      Causes of lower motor neurone facial palsy
      • Bell’s palsy: the commonest cause (see below).
      • Pontine tumours and vascular events: usually associated with other signs.
      • Acoustic neuroma: usually with evidence of other nerve involvement
        (V, VI, VIII nerves) at the cerebello-pontine angle.
      • Ramsay–Hunt syndrome (herpes zoster infection—see below).
      • Trauma.
      • Middle ear infection and cholesteatoma (see b Earache, p.550).
      • Sarcoidosis.
      • Parotid gland tumours, trauma and infection.
      • Human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV).
      Bell’s palsy
      Bell’s palsy is the commonest cause of sudden onset isolated lower motor
      neurone facial nerve palsy. It is believed to result from viral infection, pro-
      ducing swelling of the facial nerve within the temporal bone: there may be
      associated hyperacusis and loss of taste of the anterior two-thirds of one
      half of the tongue. The absence of involvement of other cranial nerves is a
      reassuring feature, helping to secure this clinical diagnosis.
      Treatment Most patients recover completely over several months
      without treatment—a small percentage are left with permanent weakness.
      Recovery is quicker if prednisolone is started within 72hr of the onset of
      symptoms (prednisolone 60mg daily for 5 days, then 10mg less each day;
      total of 10 days of treatment). Antiviral drugs do not seem to be helpful.
      Advise the use of artiﬁcial tears and an eye patch at night, to prevent
      corneal drying, and refer for ENT follow up.
      Ramsay–Hunt syndrome
      This is due to herpes zoster infection of the geniculate ganglion. Clinical
      features of Bell’s palsy are present, together with (painful) herpetic vesi-
      cles present in the external auditory meatus and occasionally also, the soft
      palate. Refer to an ENT specialist for aciclovir and follow up.
                                          SALIVARY GLAND PROBLEMS              557

Salivary gland problems
Saliva is a mixture containing water, various ions, mucin, and amylase, pro-
duced by the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual salivary glands. The
problems most commonly affecting the salivary glands are infection and
calculous disease.
Acute bilateral parotitis
Painful swelling of both parotid glands in children is most frequently
due to mumps infection (b p.222). In adults, painless bilateral parotid
swelling may be due to Sjögren’s syndrome, sarcoidosis, hypothyroidism,
lymphoma, drugs (eg oral contraceptive). In each of these cases, there are
often other features, which will help in diagnosis.
Acute unilateral parotitis
Painful unilateral parotid swelling may occur as part of mumps infection,
but also in other circumstances (eg poor oral hygiene, post-operatively).
Refer to an ENT surgeon for admission and IV antibiotics. Chronic pain-
less unilateral parotitis is often neoplastic (mostly benign) in origin.
Calculous disease
Mechanical obstruction of the ﬂow of saliva is most commonly due to
salivary gland stones, affecting the submandibular gland. Obstruction may
also occur from neoplasms or strictures.
Features Blockage of a salivary duct causes pain and swelling of the
affected gland on eating. Bimanual palpation of the ﬂoor of the mouth
may reveal a stone—occasionally this may be visible intra-orally at the
duct oriﬁce. If there is superimposed infection, it may be possible to
express pus from the duct.
Investigation Obtain X-rays of the ﬂoor of the mouth. If the patient
presses down with the tongue when the X-ray is taken the stone may be
seen more easily below the mandible on a lateral view or OPG.
Treatment Refer to an oral or ENT surgeon. If an immediate consultation
is not available, discuss the use of antibiotics in the meantime (these are
often reserved for situations where there is evidence of salivary gland
infection).
558    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Dental emergencies: 1
      Dental anatomy (Figs. 12.1 & 12.2)
      The primary teeth erupt between 6 months and 2 years—they are replaced
      by permanent teeth which ﬁrst start to appear at |6 years (Table 12.1).
      There are 20 primary and 32 permanent teeth. The permanent teeth are
      made up of 4 quadrants of 8 teeth: right upper, left upper, right lower, left
      lower. Each quadrant comprises (from medial to lateral): central incisor,
      lateral incisor, canine, ﬁrst premolar, second premolar, ﬁrst molar, second
      molar, and third molar (‘wisdom tooth’).

                                                          Permanent molars
                   Wisdom tooth                           Second premolar (biscuspid)
                                                          First premolar (biscuspid)

                                                          Canine (cuspid)
                                                          Lateral incisor
                                                          Central incisor

                         3rd 2nd 1st

      Fig. 12.1 Dental anatomy: lower jaw lateral view.

                    Central incisor
                    Lateral incisor
                    Canine (cuspid)
                    First premolar (bicuspid)
                    Second premolar (bicuspid)

                    Permanent molars
                    Wisdom tooth

      Fig. 12.2 Dental anatomy: upper jaw—view from below.
                                   DENTAL EMERGENCIES: 1   559

Table 12.1 Tooth eruption
                    Deciduous         Permanent
Incisors            6–10 months       7–8 years
Canine              16–20 months      11 years
Premolars                             11–13 years
Molars              10–24 months      6–25 years
560    CHAPTER 12 Ear, nose and throat

      Dental emergencies: 2
      Damaged teeth
      Chipped teeth and crowns which have become dislodged do not require
      immediate attention: redirect the patient instead to their dentist. Specialist
      ‘sensitive teeth’ toothpaste rubbed over the broken area of tooth may
      d pain.
      Tooth fractures which involve the pulp present with a small area of bleeding
      and are exquisitely tender to the touch. Refer to the on-call dentist.
      Mobile teeth after trauma need to be stabilized as soon as possible—advise
      the patient to avoid manipulating the tooth and to refer to the dentist.
      Simple classiﬁcation of tooth fractures

              (a)                  (b)                  (c)                  (d)
      Fig. 12.3 Simple classiﬁcation of tooth fractures (a) enamel only; (b) enamel and
      dentine; (c) enamel, dentine, and pulp; and (d) root fracture.

      Avulsed teeth
      Missing teeth need to be accounted for (especially in the unconscious
      patient) in order to exclude the possibility of aspiration. Obtain a
      postero-anterior (PA) and lateral CXR to search for both the tooth and
      secondary problems, such as pulmonary collapse and air trapping distal to
      the obstruction. Ensure that there is adequate tetanus prophylaxis.
      Avulsed permanent teeth brought to the ED may be suitable for
      re-implantation. Avulsed primary teeth are usually not suitable.
      A history of rheumatic fever, valvular heart disease, or immunosuppressive
      treatment are contraindications to re-implantation. Milk is the best easily
      available transport medium to advise a patient to bring a tooth in. The
      best chance of success lies with early re-implantation (within the ﬁrst few
      hours). Handle the tooth as little as possible. Hold it by the crown to
      clean it gently with 0.9% saline. Orientate the tooth, and then replace it
      within the socket using ﬁrm pressure (this may be easiest after LA—see
      Dental anaesthesia b p.302). Refer immediately to the on-call dentist
      for stabilization and prophylactic antibiotics (eg clarithromycin). Ensure
      tetanus prophylaxis.
                                                   DENTAL EMERGENCIES: 2              561

Post-extraction problems
Haemorrhage after tooth extraction may respond to simple measures.
Ask the patient to bite on a rolled up piece of gauze placed over the
socket for 10min. If this is unsuccessful, consider stopping the bleeding by
inserting a horizontal mattress suture (eg using ‘Vicryl’), placed under LA
using lidocaine with adrenaline (Fig. 12.4). If bleeding continues despite
these measures, apply direct pressure, send a coagulation screen and
refer to the on-call dentist.
Dry socket pain may follow tooth extraction (typically 3–8 days later)
when bone is exposed in the empty socket. Gently irrigate the socket
with warm saline. Prescribe oral antibiotics (eg penicillin or erythromycin)
and analgesia and refer to the dentist.

Fig. 12.4 Horizontal mattress suture in tooth socket.

Dental infection
Toothache without associated local or systemic symptoms/signs usually
responds to analgesia (eg ibuprofen 400mg PO tds with food). Add antibi-
otics (eg penicillin or clarithromycin) if there is a suspicion of local infection.
Advise follow-up with a dentist.
Toothache with associated swelling, trismus, dysphagia, or systemic evidence
of infection requires immediate referral to a maxillofacial surgeon for IV
antibiotics and surgical drainage.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 13                                 563

Obstetrics and
gynaecology

Gynaecological problems               564
Vaginal discharge                     566
Contraceptive problems                568
Genital injury and assault            570
Gynaecological pain                   572
Vaginal bleeding                      574
The pregnant patient                  576
Emergency normal delivery             578
Difﬁculties in normal delivery        580
Vaginal bleeding in pregnancy         582
Spontaneous abortion                  584
Ectopic pregnancy                     586
Vaginal bleeding in later pregnancy   588
Abdominal pain in pregnancy           590
Medical complications of pregnancy    592
Trauma in pregnancy                   594
Cardiac arrest in pregnancy           596
Post-partum problems                  598
564    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Gynaecological problems
      The history
      For gynaecological problems, always take a proper gynaecological history.
      This involves asking personal and sometimes sensitive questions so
      privacy and conﬁdentiality are of utmost importance. Interview the patient
      without other family members being present:
      • Ask about the presenting problem. Always ask about abdominal pain,
        dyspareunia, and vaginal discharge.
      • Take a detailed menstrual history including the date of the last menstrual
        period, length of cycle, and description of the bleeding.
      • Obtain a full obstetric history asking about children, pregnancies,
        miscarriages, terminations, and infertility treatment.
      • Do not forget to ask about sexual activity, type and number of partners
        in past year. Also establish what form of contraception has been used.
      • Has she ever been treated for a sexually transmitted disease (STD)?
      • When was the last smear test and what was the result?
      Examination procedure
      Prior to performing a vaginal examination, explain the procedure to the
      patient and ensure you are in a private room. Allow the patient privacy
      to undress. Wearing gloves, examine the patient in an unhurried manner,
      in the presence of a chaperone, who might usefully ‘guard’ the door to
      prevent sudden inadvertent interruption. Use a chaperone even when
      the patient is being examined by female member of staff. Document the
      name of the chaperone in the medical record. Full examination includes
      digital and speculum vaginal examination to inspect the vagina and cervix,
      and taking swabs. This is followed by digital bimanual palpation. In certain
      circumstances (eg patients with painful vulval ulcers), this may not be
      appropriate in the ED. Vaginal examination in young children may require
      GA and should be undertaken by an expert. Adopt a low threshold for
      referring such patients.
                                          GYNAECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS                  565

Vulvovaginal pain
Distinguish between dysuria, dyspareunia (pain on vaginal penetration),
and constant vulvovaginal pain/irritation. The latter is often associated
with infection or ulceration. Enquire about other symptoms (abdominal
pain, vaginal discharge and bleeding).
Vulval ulcers
• Herpes simplex virus is sexually transmitted and usually due to type
  II, but is increasingly due to type I virus (responsible for cold sores).
  Primary infection is extremely painful, lasting up to 3 weeks and
  sometimes causing urinary retention. Look for shallow yellow
  vulvovaginal or perineal ulcers with red edges. Cervical ulcers may also
  be present, although pain may prevent speculum examination. Refer
  primary infections immediately for aciclovir, analgesia and to exclude
  co-existing infection. Recurrent infections are less severe, but may
  last up to a week. Treat with topical and oral aciclovir (200mg ﬁve
  times a day for 1 week) and arrange genitourinary (GU) follow-up,
  with advice to avoid sexual contact meantime. Do not prescribe
  aciclovir in pregnancy, but arrange for an obstetric opinion.
• Other sexually transmitted diseases may cause ulceration: syphilis
  (non-tender indurated ulcers (‘chancres’) and lymphadenopathy),
  chancroid, lymphogranuloma venereum, and granuloma inguinale
  (b p.238). Refer to GU clinic and advise to abstain from sexual contact
  until treated.
• Squamous carcinoma causes indurated ulcers with everted edges
  especially in the elderly. Refer.
• Consider also: Behçet’s syndrome (arthritis, iritis, genital/oral ulceration),
  tuberculosis (TB), Crohn’s disease.
Painful lumps
• Bartholin’s abscess: infection of vestibular (Bartholin’s) cyst/gland at the
  posterior part of the labium majus is usually due to Staph., Strep., or
  E. coli, but may be due to N. gonorrhoea. Refer for incision and drainage
  (under GA) and a full GU screen.
• Infected sebaceous cysts may also require incision and drainage.
• Urethral carbuncle: this small, red, painful swelling at the external urethral
  meatus is due to urethral mucosal prolapse. It may cause dysuria. Refer
  to an appropriate clinic to consider excision or diathermy.
Pruritis vulvae
Vulval irritation may be caused by a generalized pruritic skin disorder
(eg eczema), infection (particularly candidiasis) and other causes of
vaginal discharge (b p.566), urinary incontinence, threadworms, and vulval
warts. Genital warts (including condylomata accuminata) are usually
sexually transmitted and caused by human papillomavirus 6. Other STDs
may coexist. Refer to GU clinic.
566    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Vaginal discharge
      May be physiological or due to atrophic vaginitis, infections including
      STDs, cervical and endometrial carcinoma, a variety of ﬁstulae, and FBs.
      Physiological
      A creamy/white discharge is normal. Variation in its consistency and
      amount occurs with puberty, pregnancy, oral contraceptive pill (OCP)
      use, ovulation, and immediately prior to menstruation.
      Atrophic vaginitis
      A profuse, sometimes bloody, yellow discharge may result from vaginal
      epithelial thinning due to d oestrogen levels associated with the meno-
      pause. This responds well to local topical or oral oestrogens, most appro-
      priately prescribed by the patient’s GP.
      ‘Thrush’
      Candida albicans is the commonest vaginal infection. A white discharge
      accompanies a red painful vulvovaginitis. Occurs in pregnancy, after oral
      antibiotics, and with HIV and diabetes: check for glycosuria. Treatment
      options include clotrimazole pessaries, oral ﬂuconazole, and topical
      application of live yoghurt. Advise GP for follow-up of any continuing
      symptoms.
      Other infections
      Refer patients suspected of the following STDs to GU clinic and advise
      abstinence from sexual contact in the meantime:
      • Neisseria gonorrhoea may be asymptomatic, cause urethritis (dysuria),
        cervicitis (vaginal discharge), or pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID;
        b Gynaecological pain, p.573).
      • Trichomonas vaginalis infection results in a smelly profuse yellow
        discharge.
      • Chlamydia trachomatis causes chronic cervicitis, Reiter’s syndrome, and
        PID. It may be present asymptomatically.
      • Gardnerella vaginalis produces a brown offensive discharge.
      Cervical and endometrial carcinoma
      Classically presenting with bleeding between periods, these may cause
      discharge. Refer to a gynaecologist.
      Fistulae
      Colovaginal ﬁstulae may follow diverticulitis or locally invasive colorectal
      carcinoma. Other ﬁstulae (including vesicovaginal and ureterovaginal) may
      occur after pelvic surgery. Refer for admission and investigation.
                                                   VAGINAL DISCHARGE            567

Foreign bodies
Tampons, condoms, and various other items may be ‘lost’ or forgotten
about in the vagina. Removal with forceps under direct vision should cure
the offensive vaginal discharge. If a condom has been removed, ascertain
whether or not post-coital contraception is required (b Contraceptive
problems, p.568). Consider hepatitis B/HIV prophylaxis and GU referral
for STD screen, depending upon the circumstances. Vaginal tampons
(particularly highly-absorbent ones which have been left in situ for many
hours) are associated with ‘toxic shock syndrome’.
Toxic shock syndrome
Tampons used during menstruation have been implicated in many cases
of the ‘toxic shock syndrome’. First described in 1978, it is caused by exo-
toxin produced by Staph. aureus (usually TSS toxin 1), or occasionally,
Strep. Multi-organ failure may follow.
Features High fever, headache, vomiting, diarrhoea, myalgia, altered
conscious level, hypotension, and a widespread erythematous macular
rash (with subsequent desquamation one week later, especially of palms
and soles).
Diagnosis Based upon clinical ﬁndings. Recent menstruation and the above
features should prompt suspicion.
Investigation Includes vaginal examination. U&E, LFTs, clotting screen, FBC,
blood lactate, blood and vaginal cultures, ECG, CXR.
Treatment Manage the patient in the resuscitation room. If due to a tampon:
remove it. Follow guidelines for severe sepsis (b p.59). Obtain venous
access, give intravenous antibiotics and start crystalloid. If hypotension is
refractory, consider measuring central venous pressure, placing an arterial
line, and starting inotropic support. The patient may require intensive care
treatment.
568    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Contraceptive problems
      Missed pill
      Advice will depend on the type of OCP the patient takes (combined, com-
      bined low dose oestrogen, or progesterone only). However, as a general
      rule, if the combined pill is delayed for more than 12hr, the patient should
      be advised to take the forgotten pill and use barrier contraception for
      7 days. If there are less than 7 days of pills left in the pack, she should run
      two packs together. The same applies if they have diarrhoea. If the patient
      has had unprotected sexual intercourse and may require emergency con-
      traception, it is worth referring to the NHS website (http://www.nhs.uk),
      which gives speciﬁc advice for each type of pill. This provides comprehensive
      patient advice that could also be printed and given to the patient.
      Post-coital contraception
      Women may attend the ED requesting post-coital contraception after:
      • Isolated unprotected sexual intercourse.
      • Burst or lost condom.
      • Missed OCP.
      • Complete or partial expulsion of intrauterine contraceptive device
        (IUCD).
      • Rape.
      The risk of pregnancy following unprotected intercourse is greatest during
      5 days around ovulation, but exists at other times also. Patients given
      post-coital contraception require assessment and treatment including
      counselling and follow-up: usually this will be with the GP and/or family
      planning clinic. Options include levonorgestrel and insertion of IUCD.
      Levonorgestrel must be given within 72hr of intercourse (95% effective
      if taken <24hr, 58% effective at 72hr). An IUCD must be inserted within
      5 days of intercourse. Both levonorgestrel and IUCD act principally to
      render the endometrium hostile to implantation.
      Levonorgestrel (previously called ‘the morning after pill’)
      In the UK, pharmacists can sell this without prescription to women
      aged over 16 years. It is usually the preferred option if patient presents
      within 72hr of unprotected intercourse. Exclude contraindications (acute
      porphyria, pregnancy, focal migraine), then give levonorgestrel 1.5mg
      (Levonelle® 1500) as soon as possible. Advise the patient to return if
      she vomits shortly after taking the medication: give a replacement dose if
      vomiting occurs within 3hr of taking it. Explain that there is a chance of
      failure. Arrange follow-up (usually with the GP) in 3 weeks to conﬁrm
      that menstruation has occurred. Advise alternative contraception (eg
      condoms) meantime and discuss future contraception plans. Advise also
      about the theoretical risk of ectopic pregnancy: instruct her to return if
      she develops abdominal pain. Document that this advice has been given.
      Note: hormonal emergency contraception is less effective if the patient
      is already taking enzyme-inducing drugs: take specialist advice. Options
      include an IUCD or i dose of levonorgestrel to 3mg (see BNF).
                                            CONTRACEPTIVE PROBLEMS              569

IUCD
This may be useful for patients unable to take the OCP (eg previous pul-
monary embolus), patients who wish to use IUCD long-term and for those
presenting between 3 and 5 days after unprotected intercourse. Failure is
very rare. Insertion is uncomfortable and requires appropriate training:
refer to the gynaecology team. Note that IUCD should not be used with
a history of recent PID.
Prescribing to patients on OCP
Both progestogen-only oral contraceptives and (combined) OCP may fail
if enzyme inducing drugs are prescribed. These include: rifampicin, rifab-
utin, carbamazepine, phenytoin, topiramate, griseofulvin, phenobarbital,
and primidone. Patients need alternative or additional contraception if
these drugs are started. Rifampicin and rifabutin are such potent enzyme-
inducing drugs that contraceptive precautions should continue for at least
4 weeks, even after a short course of rifabutin or rifampicin (as used for
prophylaxis of meningococcal infection).
Antibiotics and the OCP (refer to BNF)
Broad spectrum antibiotics commonly prescribed in the ED may inter-
fere with oestrogen absorption and cause contraceptive failure. Before
prescribing antibiotics to a female of childbearing age, ask whether she
is taking the OCP. Advise additional contraceptive precautions (eg
condoms), whilst taking the antibiotics and for 7 days after. If these 7 days
run beyond the end of a packet, start the next packet immediately without
a break. Document in the notes that this advice has been given.
570    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Genital injury and assault
      The history may be misleading. Combine a high index of suspicion with a
      full examination to exclude signiﬁcant injury.
      Blunt genital injury may result from falls astride. Most resultant vulval
      haematomas settle with rest and ice packs. Refer very large haematomas
      for evacuation in theatre.
      Penetrating injury may follow assault, FB insertion, or migration/
      perforation of an IUCD (particularly during insertion). Abdominal pain
      associated with a vaginal wound may be due to peritonitis. Obtain venous
      access, erect chest X-ray (for free gas), abdominal X-ray (for FB), group
      and save, give antibiotics, and refer. Refer other vaginal tears without
      peritonitis for exploration and repair.
      Rape and sexual assault
      Rape is deﬁned in the UK as vulval penetration by the penis without
      consent. Rape and other forms of sexual assault are believed to be grossly
      under-reported. Those who do report it have special requirements. Privacy
      is essential: ideally, a specially equipped room will be devoted to assess-
      ment of women who have been sexually assaulted. Ensure that a female
      member of staff is present throughout. Documentation must be legible
      and meticulous. An established protocol will allow prompt and thorough
      investigation and treatment. Usually, ED staff provide emergency treat-
      ment and resuscitation, but most of the other aspects, including collection
      of forensic evidence are dealt with by a forensic physician (police surgeon),
      ideally in a specialized Sexual Assault Referral Centre. Sometimes, women
      initially decline police involvement: full assessment and documentation
      may prove useful if there is a change of mind.
      First exclude life-threatening or serious injuries.
      History
      Establish the type, date, time, and place of the assault. Ask what occurred
      (vaginal/anal penetration, oral sexual activity, other injuries). Ask about
      contraception use and enquire about LMP. Find out what is known about
      the assailant(s), and their risk of HIV and hepatitis B. In particular are they
      injecting drug users, do they originate from sub-Saharan Africa, are they
      homosexual?
      Examination
      Look for evidence of vaginal, oral or anal injury (the forensic physician
      will take swabs). Record any other injuries, such as bites, bruising, or skin
      wounds (photographs of non-genital injuries may be useful—taken by the
      police with the patient’s consent).
      Investigation
      Obtain written informed consent. The police will be keen to retain
      clothing, loose hairs, ﬁngernail clippings, and tampons for evidence.
      Similarly, the forensic physician will take appropriate swabs (vaginal, oral,
      anal). Perform a pregnancy test. Take and store blood for future DNA and
      viral testing.
                                          GENITAL INJURY AND ASSAULT                571

Treatment
• Resuscitate as necessary. Refer urgently the 1% of patients who have
  signiﬁcant genital injuries (eg vaginal tears) requiring surgical intervention.
• Consider the need for post-coital contraception (see b p.568).
• If the patient is not immunized, give hepatitis B immunoglobulin and
  start an active immunization course.
• Assess the risk of HIV. If the assailant is known to have HIV or is from
  an at risk group, discuss the risk of disease transmission with the patient.
  Involve a local expert such as a virologist or infectious disease specialist
  prior to offering HIV prophylaxis (b Needlestick injury, p.418).
• Assess tetanus vaccine requirements.
• Arrange follow-up to exclude STD. Consider antibiotic prophylaxis
  against STD if the patient is unlikely to attend follow-up: liaise with the
  GU team.
• Provide initial counselling and ensure a safe place to stay (a social
  worker may arrange this).
• Arrange future counselling. Inform the patient about independent local
  advice available (eg Rape Crisis Centre).
• Ascertain from the patient if she wishes her GP to be informed.
Telephone advice
Women may telephone the ED for advice after being raped. Advise them
to inform the police immediately, and then attend the police station or
the ED. Discourage them from washing, changing clothes, using a toilet or
brushing teeth before being examined.
572    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Gynaecological pain
      Gynaecological disorders presenting to the ED with abdominal pain may
      be difﬁcult to distinguish from other disorders. Obtain a full history of
      the pain: sudden onset of severe colicky pain follows ovarian torsion and
      acute vascular events; more insidious onset and continuous pain occur in
      infection and inﬂammation. Radiation of the pain into the back or legs sug-
      gests gynaecological origin. Other clues in the history include co-existing
      symptoms of vaginal discharge, vaginal bleeding, or missed last menstrual
      period (LMP).
      Abdominal and pelvic pain in early pregnancy may be due to ectopic
      pregnancy or threatened abortion (b p.584): both occur in patients
      who do not realize that they are pregnant or who deny the possibility of
      pregnancy due to embarrassment.
      Pain related to the menstrual cycle
      Consider ﬁrst: could any associated vaginal bleeding be from ectopic
      pregnancy or threatened abortion?
      Physiological dysmenorrhoea Pain regularly preceding menstruation and
      peaking on the ﬁrst day of a period may be physiological. Suggest NSAID
      and refer to the GP.
      Endometriosis Growth of functional endometrial tissue in the pelvis
      outside the uterus may produce cysts and adhesions. Patients often
      present age 830 years with dysmenorrhoea and menstrual problems,
      infertility and dyspareunia. Symptoms are usually chronic and recurrent
      in a cyclical fashion, and are appropriately followed up by the GP.
      Occasionally, an endometrial cyst may rupture and bleed severely into
      the pelvis, presenting in similar fashion to ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
      Resuscitate for hypovolaemia and refer urgently.
      Rupture of a corpus luteum cyst Occurs premenstrually, but may also
      cause signiﬁcant haemorrhage, requiring resuscitation.
      Mittelschmerz Mid-cycle extrusion of an ovum from a follicular cyst can
      cause abdominal pain, which seldom requires admission or investigation.
      Uterine problems
      Perforation is seen especially in the presence of IUCD.
      Leiomyomas (‘ﬁbroids’) may undergo torsion (sudden severe colicky pain
      with tender uterus), or may infarct (‘red degeneration’) particularly during
      pregnancy. Refer such suspected problems for specialist investigation.
      Ovarian problems
      Torsion causes sudden onset sharp unilateral pain and usually involves an
      already enlarged ovary (cyst, neoplasm). Abdominal and per vagina (PV)
      tenderness may be present. Clinical diagnosis is difﬁcult: if suspected,
      refer for USS and/or laparoscopy.
      Bleeding into an ovarian cyst may present similarly and require investigation.
                                                GYNAECOLOGICAL PAIN              573

Pelvic inﬂammatory disease
This term includes infection which has spread from the cervix to the
uterus (endometritis), Fallopian tubes (salpingitis), ovaries (oophoritis), or
adjacent peritoneum (peritonitis). Severity ranges from chronic low grade
infection (with relatively mild symptoms) to acute infection (with severe
symptoms) which may result in abscess formation.
Causes 90% are sexually transmitted: sexually active women aged
15–20 years are at particular risk. Most of the remaining 10% follow
pregnancy terminations or dilatation and curettage.
Organisms Chlamydia trachomatis commonest. Also: Neisseria gonorrhoea,
Mycoplasma hominis, Ureaplasma urealyticum.
Features Bilateral lower abdominal tenderness, vaginal discharge, fever
>38oC, abnormal vaginal bleeding, deep dyspareunia, cervical motion
tenderness, and adnexal tenderness all point to PID.
Management Resuscitate with IV ﬂuids if shocked. Check urinalysis and
send high vaginal swab and cervical swab, FBC, ESR. Refer all suspected
cases to the gynaecologist: even though not all will require admission,
they will require antibiotics (eg oral oﬂoxacin 400 mg twice daily plus oral
metronidazole 400mg twice daily for 14 days) and follow-up.
Sequelae Ectopic pregnancy (5 × i risk) or infertility, therefore have a low
threshold for empirical treatment. (See http://www.rcog.org.uk).
574    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Vaginal bleeding
      See b Vaginal bleeding in pregnancy, p.582.
      Triage ahead patients with severe bleeding or evidence of hypovolaemic
      shock. Resuscitate ﬁrst (O2, cross-match and obtain Rhesus status, start
      IV ﬂuids) and ask questions later. Most patients with vaginal bleeding,
      however, do not require resuscitation. Take a careful menstrual history and
      ask about associated symptoms. Attempt to assess the amount of bleeding.
      Interpretation of a patient’s description is notoriously difﬁcult, but useful
      pointers are the presence of clots and the rate of tampon use. Always
      consider the possibility of pregnancy: remember that ruptured ectopic
      pregnancy can present before a period is missed (b p.586). Examine for
      evidence of hypovolaemia and abdominal masses/tenderness. Depending
      upon the circumstances, speculum and bimanual vaginal examinations may
      be required: local policy will determine who should perform this.
      Menorrhagia
      Dysfunctional uterine bleeding Heavy and/or irregular periods without
      obvious pelvic pathology may result from hormonal imbalance. It is
      particularly common at menarche. Most settle without treatment or with
      simple measures (eg mefenamic acid 500mg PO tds after food). Refer to
      the GP, unless the bleeding is very heavy.
      Uterine leiomyomas (ﬁbroids) Often cause menorrhagia. May present
      with a painful complication, such as torsion or infarction.
      Other causes Endometriosis, PID, IUCD, polyps, vaginal carcinoma,
      hypothyroidism.
      Bleeding unrelated to pregnancy or periods
      Trauma The history may be elusive.
      Post-operative Signiﬁcant bleeding is a risk of any gynaecological operation.
      Resuscitate and refer.
      OCP problems Breakthrough bleeding on the OCP may be due to
      endometrial hyperplasia. Exclude treatable vaginal/cervical lesions, arrange
      a cervical smear and refer to GP.
      Cervical erosion Replacement of stratiﬁed squamous epithelium by
      columnar epithelium may produce a mucoid discharge with a small
      amount of post-coital or intermenstrual bleeding. The cervix appears red.
      Obtain a cervical smear and arrange follow-up.
      Cervical polyp Causes post-coital bleeding. Refer to the gynaecologist.
      Cervical cancer 90% are squamous carcinoma. Strongly associated with
      human papilloma virus, some consider it an STD. Suspect in anyone
      presenting with post-coital or intermenstrual bleeding. Speculum
      examination reveals nodules, ulcers, or erosions, which may bleed to
      touch. Advanced disease may present with pyometra, ureteric obstruction,
      rectovaginal ﬁstula. Arrange urgent gynaecology follow-up for any patient
      with an abnormal looking cervix.
                                               VAGINAL BLEEDING        575

Uterine carcinoma Mostly adenocarcinoma. Classically presents with
heavy and frequent post-menopausal bleeding, but normal examination.
Arrange assessment and diagnostic curettage with the gynaecologist.
Other causes Thrombocytopenia, other coagulation disorders and anti-
coagulant drugs.
576    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      The pregnant patient
      Pregnant patients presenting with emergency problems create under-
      standable anxiety. There are two patients: one may be suffering unseen.
      Maintaining foetal oxygenation is crucial: call the obstetrician early.
      Terminology
      The 40 weeks of pregnancy are divided into 3 trimesters. Traditionally, prob-
      lems in the ﬁrst trimester are considered ‘gynaecological’.
      • Gravidity = total number of pregnancies (eg a woman in ﬁrst pregnancy is
        a ‘primigravida’).
      • Parity = number of pregnancies after 24 weeks + number before (eg a
        woman who has had 1 child and 2 spontaneous abortions is described as 1
        + 2; gravidity = 3).
      • Abortion is foetal death before 24 wks; stillbirth is foetal death after 24 wks.
      Progression of pregnancy (see also Fig. 13.1)
      Peristalsis and ciliary action carries the fertilized ovum to the uterus,
      which it reaches as a blastocyst 85 days after ovulation. The blastocyst
      implants in the endometrium: the inner part forms the embryo, the outer
      part membranes and placenta. Trophoblastic tissue produces human cho-
      rionic gonadotrophin (HCG), (peaks in ﬁrst trimester) acting on the
      corpus luteum, (essential until the placenta produces oestrogen and
      progesterone). HCG then d, whereas oestrogen and progesterone i.
      Symptoms of pregnancy Amenorrhoea, breast tenderness and fullness,
      polyuria, tiredness, nausea (appear by 86 weeks). Vomiting is common,
      occasionally severe enough to cause dehydration and weight loss
      (‘hyperemesis gravidarum’). Refer for admission and rehydration.
      Signs of pregnancy Not obvious in early pregnancy: uterine enlargement (see
      opposite), breast changes.
      Pregnancy testing see b p.582.
      Maternal physiological changes
      Cardiac output i by 30%, peripheral vascular resistance d: BP (especially
      diastolic) d slightly. Blood vol i by 30%, plasma vol i by 45%, Hb d slightly.
      Systolic ﬂow murmurs are common. Water retention occurs, causing
      ankle oedema and carpal tunnel syndrome. Ventilation i: the patient may feel
      dyspnoeic. Backache is common.
      d Lower oesophageal pressure causes heartburn; d gut motility causes
      constipation; i venous pressure in pelvis may cause varicose veins and
      haemorrhoids. Platelets, ESR, cholesterol, ﬁbrinogen i; albumin d.
      See Table 13.1 for normal values in pregnant and non-pregnant women.
      Diagnostic imaging in pregnancy
      Try to avoid X-rays and CT scans. Excessive radiation exposure risks con-
      genital malformation, growth retardation, and neoplasia. However, do not
      withhold necessary X-rays in life-threatening illness. Most head, neck, and
      extremity X-rays can be obtained without foetal risk by appropriate lead
      screening. When requesting X-rays, ensure the radiographer is aware the
      patient is pregnant. USS has not been shown to have adverse effects. If in
      doubt, discuss imaging requests with a radiologist.
      Prescribing in pregnancy and during breast-feeding
      Consult the BNF before prescribing drugs in pregnancy or during breast
      feeding. The following are generally considered safe in pregnancy: penicillin,
      cephalosporins, nystatin, paracetamol, chlorphenamine, cimetidine.
      Avoid the following: trimethoprim, tetracyclines, streptomycin, warfarin,
      thiazides.
                                                    THE PREGNANT PATIENT              577

                                                           36 weeks

                                                           40 weeks

                                                           22 weeks

                                                           16 weeks

                                                           12 week

Fig. 13.1 Uterine size in pregnancy.

 Table 13.1 Normal values in pregnant and non-pregnant women
 Value                      Non-pregnant                Pregnant
 Haematocrit                0.37–0.47                   0.32–0.41
 Haemoglobin (g/dL)         11.5–16.0                   11.0–15.0
 White cell count (/L)      4.0–11.0 × 109              5.0–16.0 × 109
 Platelets (/L)             150–400 × 109               134–400 × 109
 ESR (mm/hr)                (age in years + 10)/2       44–114
 Fibrinogen (g/L)           2–4                         4–6
 Albumin (g/L)              35–50                       28–40
 Urea (mmol/L)              2.5–6.7                     1.6–6.0
 Creatinine (mmol/L)        <110                        38–90
 pCO2 (kPa)                 4.5–6.0 (34–46mmHg)         3.6–4.2 (27–32mmHg)
 pO2 (kPa)                  >10.6 (>80.6mmHg)           >10.6 (>80.6mmHg)
 HCO 3– (mmol/L)            24–28                       18–23

‘All pregnant women attending (accident and) emergency departments with
anything other than minor complaints should be seen quickly and in conjunction with
an obstetrician or senior midwife.’ (See http://www.cmace.org.uk/).
578    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Emergency normal delivery
      Sometimes even the best laid plans for controlled delivery in the labour
      ward go awry and patients present in an advanced stage of labour and
      deliver in the ED. This is particularly likely in a very rapid (‘precipitate’)
      labour. ED staff therefore need to know about normal delivery.
      Labour
      At onset of labour, painless and irregular (Braxton Hicks) contractions are
      replaced by painful uterine contractions with cervical dilatation (>3cm) ±
      ‘show’ (mucus/blood discharge). There may be rupture of membranes.
      Presentation
      In the ED only ‘OA’ (occiput anterior) vertex presentations are likely to
      proceed so fast that delivery occurs before specialist help arrives.
      Stages of labour
      First Onset of labour until cervix is fully dilated (10cm). Usually lasts >6hr.
      The upper part or ‘segment’ of the uterus contracts, the lower segment
      (including the cervix) dilates. Contractions i in frequency (every 2min)
      and duration (last 1min). The head starts to descend.
      Second Full dilatation until baby is born. Lasts 840min in primigravida,
      820min in multigravida. Contraction of upper segment, abdominal muscles
      and diaphragm cause head to descend then rotate (usually to lie occiput
      anterior). An overwhelming desire to push helps expel the baby.
      Third Placenta and membranes deliver and uterus retracts (815min).
      Assessment of a patient in labour
      Check pulse, BP, and palpate the abdomen. Listen for foetal heart sounds
      with fetal stethoscope or Doppler probe (rate should be 120–160/min).
      Gently examine the perineum. Do not fully examine the vagina unless the
      head is crowning and birth is imminent. Instead, transfer to labour ward.
      Management of delivery (see Fig. 13.2)
      • Call obstetric/paediatric/anaesthetic help and encourage partner to stay.
      • Offer Entonox® (50:50 mixture of nitrous oxide and O2).
      • Don sterile gloves and stand on the patient’s right.
      • As head crowns discourage bearing down: advise rapid shallow breaths.
      • Use left hand to control escape of head (to prevent perineal tearing).
      • Press gently forwards with right thumb and ﬁngers either side of anus.
      • Once head is delivered, allow it to extend.
      • Feel for cord around neck: slip it over head, or if impossible, clamp, and
        divide.
      • Allow anterior shoulder to deliver ﬁrst (mother pushing if necessary).
      • Give 5U oxytocin and 500mcg ergometrine IM (Syntometrine®).
      • Deliver the baby, wrap him/her up and resuscitate as necessary
        (b p.642).
      Management of the cord
      Once baby cries and cord pulsation ceases, hold baby level with mother
      and clamp the cord twice (15cm from umbilicus). Divide between clamps.
      Place a plastic Hollister crushing clamp 1–2cm from umbilicus and cut 1cm
      distally. Check that 2 normal arteries are present in the cord.
                                            EMERGENCY NORMAL DELIVERY               579

Management of the third stage
A few minutes after delivery, regular contractions begin again, causing the
placenta to detach. The cord may be seen to move down accompanied by
a small gush of blood. The placenta may be felt in the vagina. The Brandt–
Andrews technique helps removal: apply gentle downwards traction on
the cord whilst exerting upward pressure on uterus (preventing inversion).
Examine placenta carefully. Give Rhesus anti-D immunoglobulin if Rh –ve
(b p.582). Immediate post-partum problems are the domain of the
specialist and include: post-partum haemorrhage, amniotic ﬂuid embolism,
uterine rupture, or inversion.

    (1)                                        (4)
    1st stage of labour. The cervix            Birth of the anterior shoulder.
    dilates. After full dilatation             The shoulders rotate to lie in the
    the head flexes further and                anteroposterior diameter of the
    descends further into the pelvis.          pelvic outlet. The head rotates
                                               externally. Downward and
                                               backward traction of the head by
                                               the birth attendant aids delivery
                                               of the anterior shoulder.

   (2)
   During the early second
   stage the head rotates at
   the level of the ischial spine
   so the occiput lies in the
                                                (5)
   anterior part of pelvis.
                                                Birth of the posterior
   In late second stage the
                                                shoulder is aided by lifting
   head broaches the vulval ring
                                                the head upwards whilst
   (crowning) and the perineum
                                                maintaining traction.
   stretches over the head.

                                        (3)
                                        The head is born. The shoulders still lie
                                        transversely in the midpelvis.
Fig. 13.2 Management of pregnancy.
580    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Difﬁculties in normal delivery
      Meconium-stained liquor
      See b Cardiopulmonary resuscitation of the newborn, p.644.
      Imminent perineal tear
      The risk of perineal tearing may be minimized by controlled delivery. An
      extensive tear risks the integrity of the external anal sphincter. If a tear
      is imminent, perform an episiotomy (Fig. 13.3). Inﬁltrate 5–10mL of 1%
      lidocaine postero-laterally from the posterior fourchette. Cut the perineal
      tissues postero-laterally using straight scissors with blunt points (see
      diagram below), avoiding large veins. After delivery, carefully examine the
      episiotomy wound which needs to be closed in layers using absorbable
      sutures.

                     Line of incision

                      Anal sphincter

      Fig. 13.3 Performing an episiotomy.

      Difﬁculty in delivering the shoulders (shoulder dystocia)
      After delivery of the head, the shoulders usually rotate to lie in an antero-
      posterior (AP) direction, so the ﬁrst one can be delivered anteriorly. If
      this does not occur, apply gentle digital pressure to obtain rotation. Try
      to help delivery of the anterior shoulder by gently bending the baby’s
      neck towards the mother’s anus. The reverse action may then deliver the
      posterior shoulder. If these manoeuvres are unsuccessful, hook a ﬁnger
      into the axilla of the anterior shoulder to bring it down.
This page intentionally left blank
582    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Vaginal bleeding in pregnancy
      Vaginal bleeding in pregnancy produces understandable maternal distress.
      It may indicate serious illness that is a threat to the life of both the foetus
      and mother.
      Causes
      An indication of possible causes of vaginal bleeding related to pregnancy
      is apparent from gestation (see opposite). Bleeding may, of course, be
      unrelated to pregnancy.
      Pregnancy testing
      Even if the patient denies pregnancy and there is no history of
      amenorrhoea, consider pregnancy. Most pregnancy tests look for B-HCG
      produced by the developing trophoblast. Serum B-HCG levels rapidly
      i so that pregnancy may be conﬁrmed by serum tests within days of
      implantation and remain +ve until 20 weeks. Urine tests have improved
      considerably in recent years, but do not rely upon them to deﬁnitely
      exclude pregnancy.
      USS easily demonstrates most pregnancies by 5 weeks after LMP.
      Principles of treating blood loss in pregnancy
      • Give O2.
      • Obtain venous access with large bore cannulae and replace ﬂuids
        aggressively.
      • Consider coagulopathy: obtain FBC and clotting screen.
      • Consider prophylaxis against Rhesus haemolytic disease of the
        newborn.
      Anti-D immunoglobulin
      A Rhesus –ve mother exposed to Rh +ve foetal blood during pregnancy
      may develop antibodies. These IgG antibodies may cross the placenta
      during subsequent pregnancies and cause Rhesus haemolytic disease of
      the (Rh +ve) newborn. The production of maternal antibodies may be
      prevented by appropriate use of anti-D Ig. Consider this every time that
      there is possible foeto-maternal bleeding (ruptured ectopic pregnancy,
      spontaneous abortion, trauma, antepartum haemorrhage, labour, and
      delivery). Guidelines have been produced for the use of anti-D Ig (see
      www.rcog.org.uk). Check the Rhesus and antibody status of all women
      with bleeding in early pregnancy and give 250U anti-D Ig IM to those that
      are Rh –ve and non-immune. After delivery or bleeding occurring in later
      pregnancy, Rh –ve mothers are likely to require larger doses of anti-D
      Ig (see BNF). Therefore, check the Rhesus and antibody status and also
      perform a Kleihauer test. This will give an indication of the extent of any
      foeto-maternal haemorrhage: Blood Transfusion Service will advise.
                                     VAGINAL BLEEDING IN PREGNANCY             583

Causes of vaginal bleeding in pregnancy
Table 13.2 Causes of vaginal bleeding in pregnancy
           Pregnancy related                  Non-pregnancy related
1st trimester   Spontaneous abortion    At any stage   Infection
                Ectopic pregnancy                      Vaginal ulcers
                Trophoblastic disease                  Vaginal inﬂammation
                                                       Cervical erosions
                                                       Cervical polyps
                                                       Coagulation disorders
                                                       Trauma
2nd trimester   Spontaneous abortion
                Trophoblastic disease
                Abruptio placentae
                Placenta praevia
3rd trimester   Abruptio placentae
                Placenta praevia
                ‘Show’ of pregnancy
                Vasa praevia
584    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Spontaneous abortion
      Terminology
      Use the term ‘miscarriage’ (not ‘abortion’) with patients. Both refer to foetal
      loss before 24 weeks. Spontaneous abortion affects >20% pregnancies.
      Threatened abortion refers to vaginal bleeding through a closed cervical
      os. 50% proceed to miscarry. If the cervix dilates or products of conception
      are passed, abortion is inevitable. Inevitable abortion becomes complete
      abortion if all products are passed. Retained products of conception
      in an incomplete abortion may become infected, causing a septic abortion.
      Alternatively, products may be retained as a missed abortion, which carries
      a risk of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
      Aetiology
      Mothers may feel guilty, but the causes are largely beyond their control.
      Risk factors include:
      • Chromosomal anomalies (>50%).
      • First pregnancy, maternal disease, and age >30 years.
      • Uterine abnormalities.
      • Drugs (especially isotretinoin).
      • Cervical incompetence, immunological factors, and trauma.
      Approach
      Establish the gestation. Think: is this a ruptured ectopic pregnancy? Vaginal
      bleeding in spontaneous abortion ranges from light to severe. Severe
      bleeding with hypovolaemia may occur in inevitable abortion. Abdominal
      pain is associated with a lower chance of fetal survival. Any pain with
      threatened abortion tends to be light and crampy. Severe pain and
      bleeding with hypotension and bradycardia implies ‘cervical shock’, where
      products of conception are stuck in the cervical os. Abdominal or cervical
      tenderness suggests an alternative diagnosis (ectopic pregnancy or septic
      abortion). Vaginal examination provides other important clues: look for
      cervical dilatation (remember that the external os of a multigravida usually
      accepts a ﬁngertip) and products in the os.
      Investigation
      USS may exclude ectopic pregnancy and indicate foetal viability: local
      policy will determine who performs this. Urine pregnancy tests remain
      +ve for several days after foetal death. Check Rhesus status and baseline
      serum B-HCG. Cross-match and obtain FBC if shocked.
      Treatment
      Resuscitate if signiﬁcant pain or haemorrhage and refer urgently. If cervical
      shock is present, remove products of conception from the cervical os using
      sponge forceps. If severe bleeding continues, give 500mcg ergometrine IM.
      Unfortunately, no intervention appears to alter foetal survival in threatened
      abortion. Patients with light bleeding, no abdominal pain, and a closed os
      (threatened abortion) may be allowed home after USS and gynaecology
      review. Reassure, emphasize that it is not her fault, advise bed rest and
      abstinence from sexual intercourse until gynaecology follow-up in 2 days.
      Provide Rhesus anti-D Ig 250u IM if Rh –ve and non-immune.
                                              SPONTANEOUS ABORTION                 585

Septic abortion
Sepsis may follow spontaneous, surgically induced or ‘backstreet’ abortion.
Organisms S. aureus, C. welchii, Bacteroides, E. coli, streptococci, Clostridium
sordelli.
Features vaginal bleeding, offensive discharge, i T°, d BP, uterine
tenderness, peritonitis. Note that pyrexia is not invariable—particularly
with Clostridium sordelli which can result in a severe infection with high
mortality.
Obtain FBC, clotting screen, blood cultures, blood lactate, vaginal swabs,
X-match, Rhesus status, erect CXR (to look for free gas).
Resuscitate with IV ﬂuids, give co-amoxiclav 1.2g IV, follow the severe
sepsis guidelines (b p.59) and refer urgently. Monitor urine output and
consider central and arterial lines.
Missed abortion
Very occasionally presents several weeks or months after foetal death
with no expected features of pregnancy, a –ve pregnancy test and DIC.
Resuscitate, and involve senior obstetrician and haematologist.
586    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Ectopic pregnancy
      Gestational sac implantation outside the uterus has i and now occurs in
      81 in 100 pregnancies in the UK. 96% implant in the Fallopian tube, 2%
      in the interstitial part of uterus, 1.5% intra-abdominally. The risk of
      heterotopic pregnancy (combined intrauterine and ectopic pregnancy) is
      81 in 4000.
      Importance
      Ectopic pregnancy is the commonest cause of maternal mortality in the
      ﬁrst trimester. The diagnosis is frequently missed. Consider it in any young
      woman presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding, especially
      when combined with an episode of syncope.
      Risk factors
      These include anything which delays or limits normal transit of the ferti-
      lized ovum to the uterus: PID, pelvic surgery/adhesions, previous ectopic,
      endometriosis, assisted fertilization, IUCD, progesterone only pill, con-
      genital anatomical variants, ovarian and uterine cysts/tumours. Note that
      although pregnancy is unusual after tubal ligation, when it does occur
      there is a relatively high chance (81 in 6) of it being an ectopic pregnancy.
      Pathology
      Implantation of the gestational sac in the Fallopian tube may have three
      results:
      • Extrusion (tubal abortion) into the peritoneal cavity.
      • Spontaneous involution of pregnancy.
      • Rupture through the tube causing pain and bleeding.
      Implantation in a uterine horn is particularly dangerous: pregnancy
      may reach 10–14 weeks before rupture. Exceptionally, intraperitoneal
      pregnancies may proceed almost to term.
      Symptoms
      Ectopic pregnancy may present with sudden severe lower abdominal pain
      with collapse or fainting, and vaginal bleeding. There is usually (but not
      always) a history of amenorrhoea (often 8 weeks). Haemorrhage may
      cause shoulder tip pain (from blood irritating the diaphragm) and features
      of hypovolaemia. Nausea and vomiting are common.
      Many patients have more chronic symptoms, with recurrent abdominal
      pain and slight irregular vaginal bleeding, which may be fresh or dark (like
      ‘prune juice’). Pain may have continued for > 1week before presentation,
      occasionally as long as 4 weeks. The pain may be worse on defecation.
      Some patients have no vaginal bleeding.
      Enquire about symptoms of pregnancy (eg breast tenderness) and possible
      risk factors for ectopic pregnancy.
                                                 ECTOPIC PREGNANCY            587

Signs
Look for hypovolaemic shock. If present, volume replacement must
accompany full assessment. Abdominal tenderness is variable, ranging
from mild to severe with peritonism. Cullen’s sign (discolouration around
the umbilicus) is of historical interest only. Bimanual vaginal examination
reveals tender adnexa and sometimes a mass, but may be better deferred
to a specialist (risk of i bleeding). Speculum inspection usually shows
vaginal blood.
Investigation
Must not delay resuscitation and referral.
Pregnancy test is almost always +ve, but serum B-HCG levels are lower
than expected for normal pregnancy.
Transabdominal USS is useful if it demonstrates an intrauterine pregnancy,
free ﬂuid in the pouch of Douglas and/or an adnexal mass. Frequently it is
inconclusive. Transvaginal USS may be better.
Differential diagnosis
• Threatened abortion: bleeding is usually more severe (b p.584).
• Ruptured corpus luteum cyst: the corpus luteum supports pregnancy for
  the ﬁrst 6–8 weeks. Rupture causes sudden peritoneal irritation, but
  rarely bleeds signiﬁcantly.
• PID (b p.573): Note that ectopic pregnancy can cause mild pyrexia
  and a raised WCC, which may easily be misinterpreted as evidence of
  pelvic infection.
• Trophoblastic disease (b Vaginal bleeding in later pregnancy, p.588).
Treatment
Give O2, insert two large (12 or 14G) cannulae, cross-match 6U of blood,
request Rhesus status. Resuscitate initially with crystalloid IV ﬂuids as
necessary. If suspected, refer urgently to the gynaecology team since
sudden deterioration may occur. Signiﬁcant haemorrhage requires urgent
surgery. Alert the anaesthetist and theatre team early. Check Rhesus and
antibody status: anti-D immunoglobulin may be needed (b p.582).
588    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Vaginal bleeding in later pregnancy
      Gestational trophoblastic disease
      Occasionally, a fertilized ovum may form abnormal trophoblastic tissue,
      but no fetus. The pathological spectrum ranges from benign hydatidiform
      mole to invasive choriocarcinoma. Choriocarcinoma is relatively rare,
      affecting 81 in 40,000 pregnancies.
      Presentation Usually vaginal bleeding at 12–16 weeks, with passage of
      tissue, which may resemble frogspawn. Often accompanying abdominal
      pain and sometimes pre-eclampsia or eclampsia. The uterus may be much
      larger than expected for dates. DIC may occur.
      Investigations USS shows ‘snowstorm’ and no foetus. Serum HCG is
      grossly i.
      Management Obtain venous access, serum HCG, FBC, group and save, IV
      ﬂuids/resuscitation, and refer.
      Antepartum haemorrhage
      Bleeding after 20 weeks occurs in 2.5% of pregnancies. Abruptio placentae
      and placenta praevia are most likely causes, although other cervical or
      vaginal lesions may be responsible.
      Abruptio placentae
      Premature separation of the normally situated placenta affects 81% of
      pregnancies. It causes haemorrhage which may risk the foetus, depending
      on the extent of placental involvement, and rapidity of separation.
      Risk factors Pre-eclampsia, previous abruption, trauma (b p.594), smoking,
      i parity, cocaine.
      Presentation There is usually some vaginal bleeding (‘revealed haemorrhage’),
      but occasionally bleeding is limited to the conﬁnes of the uterus (‘concealed
      haemorrhage’). In either case, there may be much more utero-placental
      bleeding than is immediately apparent. There may be abdominal pain
      and tenderness or back pain. Abruptio placentae may precipitate labour.
      A large bleed can cause DIC or absent foetal heart sounds.
      Placenta praevia
      The placenta is situated wholly or partly over the lower uterine segment
      and cervical os.
      Risk factors Mother aged >35 years, high parity, previous placenta praevia,
      twins, uterine abnormalities (including previous Caesarian section).
      Presentation Most present with bright red painless vaginal bleeding in the
      third trimester. 15% present in labour.
      If placenta praevia is a possibility, do not perform digital or speculum
      vaginal examination.
      Vasa praevia
      Rarely, an abnormal foetal blood vessel may be attached to the membranes
      over the internal os. Haemorrhage may cause foetal exsanguination, usually
      during labour.
                         VAGINAL BLEEDING IN LATER PREGNANCY              589

Management of antepartum haemorrhage
• Call an obstetrician immediately.
• Give O2.
• Obtain venous access (2 large bore cannulae) and resuscitate with IV
  ﬂuids as necessary.
• Send U&E, FBC, blood glucose, cross-match, Rhesus and antibody
  status, Kleihauer test, clotting screen.
• Monitor the foetus (cardiotocography).
• USS locates the placenta, demonstrates the foetus and may show
  concealed haemorrhage.
• Give anti-D immunoglobulin as advised by Blood Transfusion Service if
  Rh –ve (b p.582).
590    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Abdominal pain in pregnancy
      Approach
      Attempting to deduce the cause of abdominal pain can ordinarily be
      quite difﬁcult: in pregnancy it is even more so. Some possible underlying
      diseases may be causing unseen foetal distress and can produce rapid
      maternal deterioration. Therefore, triage ahead, contact the obstetrician,
      and resuscitate vigorously. Initial investigations usually include BMG, uri-
      nalysis, blood tests, and USS. Vaginal bleeding accompanying abdominal
      pain implies a gynaecological or obstetric problem. Remember, however,
      that the reverse is not necessarily true: ruptured ectopic pregnancy and
      concealed haemorrhage in abruptio placentae may present without
      vaginal bleeding. In later pregnancy, even if there is doubt as to whether
      the principal problem is obstetric or not, involve the obstetrician at an
      early stage.
      Pregnancy related causes of abdominal pain
      The following are considered elsewhere:
      • Ectopic pregnancy (b p.586).
      • ‘Red degeneration’ of a ﬁbroid (b Uterine problems, p.572).
      • Gestational trophoblastic disease (b Vaginal bleeding in later preg-
        nancy, p.588).
      • Abruptio placentae (b p.588).
      • Onset of labour (b Emergency normal delivery, p.578).
      Torsion, rupture, or haemorrhage into an ovarian cyst
      This may involve the corpus luteum of pregnancy. Sudden onset lower
      abdominal pain results. USS may demonstrate the problem.
      Acute polyhydramnios
      Excessive amniotic ﬂuid may complicate pregnancy involving uni-ovular
      twins. Pain and vomiting is accompanied by a large abdomen for gestation
      and an unusually mobile foetus.
      Pre-eclampsia
      Abdominal pain (particularly right upper quadrant pain) in pregnancy may
      reﬂect pre-eclampsia (see b p.592). Check BP and urinalysis and refer
      urgently.
                                    ABDOMINAL PAIN IN PREGNANCY                 591

Non-obstetric causes of abdominal pain
Urinary tract infection
UTI is relatively common in pregnancy due to urinary stasis. Women
are at particular risk if they have had previous UTI. Abdominal/loin pain
and pyrexia with rigors indicate acute pyelonephritis. Send MSU, FBC,
and blood cultures, and refer for IV antibiotics. Treat patients with
asymptomatic UTI or cystitis without evidence of pyelonephritis with oral
antibiotics (eg amoxicillin 250mg PO tds or a cephalosporin) and arrange
GP follow-up when the MSU result will be available. When prescribing
antibiotics in pregnancy, take care to avoid those drugs which are contra-
indicated (eg trimethoprim, tetracyclines—see BNF).
Acute appendicitis
Presentation in early pregnancy may be as classically described, but can
be confused with ectopic pregnancy or rupture/torsion of an ovarian cyst.
In later pregnancy, the point of maximal tenderness in acute appendicitis
rises towards the right hypochondrium. Check BMG, serum amylase, and
urinalysis. Give analgesia and refer if suspected.
Gallstones
Pain from gallstones not infrequently presents for the ﬁrst time in preg-
nancy. The presentation of biliary colic and cholecystitis is similar to that
in the non-pregnant patient (b Biliary tract problems, p.510). USS reveals
stones and associated pathology. Give analgesia and refer: if possible, the
patient will be treated conservatively.
Acute pancreatitis
This is usually related to gallstones. There is a signiﬁcant risk to mother
and fetus. Presentation and treatment are as described in b p.508.
Perforated peptic ulcer
If suspected, obtain erect CXR with lead shield for the fetus. Resuscitate
and refer (b p.511).
Intestinal obstruction
Often follows adhesions from previous surgery. The diagnosis may not
be immediately obvious: pain, vomiting, and constipation may be initially
attributed to pregnancy. These symptoms, together with abdominal
tenderness and high pitched bowel sounds suggest the diagnosis. An erect
abdominal X-ray will conﬁrm it, but this should only be requested by a
specialist.
592    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Medical complications of pregnancy
      Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia
      This poorly understood vasospastic uteroplacental disorder affects 7% of
      pregnancies. It results in widespread systemic disturbance involving the
      liver, kidneys, coagulation, and cardiovascular systems. Placental infarcts
      may occur and compromise the foetus.
      Pre-eclampsia 2 or more of: hypertension (>140/90), proteinuria and
      oedema. Variant presentation: haemolysis, elevated LFTs, low platelets
      (HELLP syndrome) particularly affects multigravida.
      Progression to eclampsia is heralded by: confusion, headache, tremor,
      twitching, i reﬂexes. Visual disturbance and/or abdominal pain may occur.
      Eclampsia The onset of ﬁts after 20 weeks (or ﬁts in association with
      pre-eclampsia). Maternal mortality is 2%, perinatal mortality 15%.
      Management
      See www.rcog.org.uk
      • Refer all patients with BP>140/90, or proteinuria and oedema.
      • Obtain FBC, uric acid, U&E, LFTs, clotting screen, ECG, foetal
        monitoring.
      • Restrict ﬂuids to a total of 80mL/hr or 1mL/kg/hr (because of the risk of
        pulmonary oedema).
      • If there is evidence of impending eclampsia or the patient starts to
        ﬁt: call the obstetrician and anaesthetist, check BMG, control airway,
        consider left lateral position, give O2 and 4g magnesium sulphate slowly
        IV over 10min, followed by a maintenance magnesium sulphate 1g/h
        IVI. Treat recurrent ﬁts with a further 2g magnesium sulphate IV over
        10min.
      • Follow local advice regarding control of hypertension (eg labetalol 10mg
        slow IV bolus, followed by an IVI starting at 1–2mg/min, i as required).
      • Urgent delivery is a priority in eclampsia, both for mother and foetus.
      Disseminated intravascular coagulation
      DIC may complicate a variety of obstetric problems: abruptio placentae,
      intrauterine death, missed abortion, amniotic ﬂuid embolism, eclampsia,
      sepsis, trophoblastic disease.
      Clinical picture Widespread haemorrhage and microvascular occlusion.
      Obtain FBC, cross-match, clotting screen, ﬁbrin degradation products,
      ﬁbrinogen, U&E, and LFTs.
      Treatment Resuscitate with O2, IV ﬂuids (according to CVP), blood
      transfusion, and FFP. Refer urgently and consider urgent delivery and
      treatment of underlying disease.
                          MEDICAL COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY                     593

Diabetes mellitus
Pregnancy encourages hyperglycaemia. IDDM in pregnancy may be more
difﬁcult to control and is associated with an i insulin requirement. DKA
occurs relatively easily (b Hyperglycaemic crises, p.152).
Thromboembolic disease
Pregnancy carries an i risk and is a signiﬁcant cause of maternal mortality.
The exact risk in each trimester is as yet unclear, as little research has
involved pregnant women. However, it would seem that the more gravid
the woman, the greater the risk of DVT and PE. Caesarian section, pre-
vious DVT/PE, a family history and bed rest all increase the risk.
Clinical probability scoring for DVT or PE is difﬁcult as all derived scores
excluded pregnant women. Therefore, pregnant women should have
imaging, rather than D-dimer and clinical probability assessment.
USS is the safest initial investigation for DVT. Remember that to exclude
DVT with ultrasound requires either one normal complete scan (calf,
popliteal fossa and thigh) or two normal thigh and popliteal scans, one
week apart (b p.118).
Pulmonary embolism presents with pain or dyspnoea (b p.120).
Unfortunately, these are not infrequent symptoms during pregnancy. A
normal SpO2 in air will not exclude PE. Always request a CXR as this
will reveal other life threatening causes (pneumothorax) and is required
for VQ reporting. Investigation for PE starts with bilateral leg ultrasound
scans (no risk to foetus). If these are normal, the patient should have a VQ
scan (b Pulmonary embolism, p.120). If the VQ scan cannot diagnose or
exclude PE, arrange a CT scan.
During investigation for DVT or PE it is standard practice to commence
thrombosis treatment with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH).
Thrombolysis has been used successfully in peri-arrest pregnant women
with a clear clinical picture of PE. If the patient is not peri-arrest, always
endeavour to obtain diagnostic imaging.
Warfarin is teratogenic in the ﬁrst trimester and may cause fetal or
placental bleeding in later pregnancy, so avoid it in pregnancy.
Other problems
Thyrotoxicosis presents not infrequently in pregnancy.
Pre-existing heart disease worsens as blood volume and cardiac output i:
involve a specialist early.
Although rare, consider aortic dissection in any pregnant patient with
unexplained, severe chest, back or neck pain (b p.92).
594    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Trauma in pregnancy
      Background
      Principal causes are similar to those in the non-pregnant: road trafﬁc colli-
      sions, falls and assaults. Contrary to popular opinion, the use of seat belts
      does d risk of serious injury in pregnancy. The ‘lap’ belt should lie over the
      anterior superior iliac spines.
      Anatomical considerations
      The following are worthy of consideration:
      • As the uterus enlarges it rises out of the pelvis with the bladder—both
        are at i risk of injury.
      • The size of the uterus and stretching of the peritoneum make abdomi-
        nal assessment difﬁcult.
      • The bony pelvis is less prone to fracture, but retroperitoneal haemor-
        rhage may be torrential due to i vascularity.
      • The pregnant uterus may obstruct the inferior vena cava, causing supine
        hypotension and increased bleeding from lower limb wounds.
      • The diaphragm is higher in pregnancy.
      • The pituitary doubles in size and is at risk of infarction in untreated
        hypovolaemic shock.
      Physiological considerations
      Pregnancy is associated with dramatic changes in physiology:
      • Pregnant patients may tolerate up to 35% loss of blood volume before
        manifesting classic signs of hypovolaemic shock, largely at the risk of
        uteroplacental circulation.
      • The d functional residual capacity and i O2 requirement result in
        hypoxia developing more quickly.
      • There is an i risk of regurgitation of gastric contents.
      • Coagulation may be deranged or rapidly become so.
      Injuries to the uterus, placenta, and foetus
      Foetal injury Both blunt and penetrating trauma may damage the foetus. It
      is, however, more likely to suffer as a result of maternal hypoxia/hypovol-
      aemia or placental abruption.
      Placental abruption Deceleration forces in blunt trauma may shear the
      inelastic placenta from the elastic uterus. Haemorrhage (maternal and
      foetal) may be signiﬁcant and result in DIC. This may present with vaginal
      bleeding (much may be concealed internally), uterine tenderness, or foetal
      distress.
      Uterine rupture This is relatively uncommon. Major rupture causes severe
      bleeding. The uterus and foetus may be felt separately.
      Amniotic ﬂuid embolism Rare and carries a poor prognosis. Presents with
      sudden collapse, dyspnoea, d BP, ﬁtting, and bleeding (from DIC).
                                                 TRAUMA IN PREGNANCY               595

Approach to the injured pregnant patient
Follow that outlined in b Major trauma, p.319, with the additional speciﬁc
points.
History
Determine gestation and any problems in this and previous pregnancies.
Examination
• Involve an obstetrician early: examine vagina for bleeding or rupture of
  membranes.
• Palpate for fundal height (mark skin), abdominal tenderness, uterine
  contractions.
• Listen for foetal heart sounds and rate using a foetal stethoscope
  (Pinard) or Doppler probe.
• Remember that head injury may mimic eclampsia and vice-versa.
Investigation
• Check BMG, coagulation screen, Rhesus/antibody status, and Kleihauer
  test.
• Consider CVP monitoring (remembering the CVP is lower in preg-
  nancy).
• Monitor foetal heart (cardiotocograph)—the rate should be 120–160/
  min.
• USS investigates foetal viability, placental injury, gestational age, and free
  peritoneal ﬂuid.
• Do not withold essential X-rays, but do consider early USS to look
  for free intra-abdominal ﬂuid and foetal viability. Seek senior advice.
  Remember that the greatest risks from X-rays to the foetus are in early
  pregnancy. In later pregnancy, risks to the foetus may be outweighed by
  failure to identify injuries by not obtaining X-rays.
• DPL has been largely superceded by USS (FAST scan)—but if indicated,
  use a supra-umbilical open approach (see b p.347).
Treatment
• Give O2 and summon senior obstetric, ICU, and surgical help early.
• If chest drains are required insert 1–2 intercostal spaces higher than
  usual.
• Decompress the inferior vena cava by manually displacing the uterus to
  the left or by using a 15° right lateral (Cardiff) wedge, or if neck injury
  has been excluded, by nursing in left lateral position.
• Treat ﬂuid losses with aggressive IV ﬂuid replacement.
• An NG tube d risk of regurgitation and aspiration.
• Remember tetanus prophylaxis (b p.410).
• Consider anti-D immunoglobulin if the patient is Rh –ve.
• Even if there is no overt maternal injury refer for foetal monitoring for
  4hr.
• Abdominal tenderness, hypovolaemia or foetal distress may require
  urgent laparotomy.
• If the patient has a cardiac arrest, perform emergency Caesarian section
  if the patient is >24wks pregnant and 5mins has elapsed without output
  (see b p.596).
596    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Cardiac arrest in pregnancy
      Rate Estimated in late pregnancy at 71 in 30,000.
      Causes stroke, PE, uteroplacental haemorrhage, amniotic ﬂuid embolism,
      eclamptic ﬁts and haemorrhage, anaesthetic problems, and drug reactions,
      underlying heart disease. Ischaemic heart disease is rarely implicated:
      the underlying rhythm is more commonly pulseless electrical activity
      than ventricular ﬁbrillation. Unfortunately, this is reﬂected in the poor
      prognosis.
      Remember the following physiological factors
      • The airway is difﬁcult to control (large breasts, full dentition, neck
        oedema and obesity). Ventilation may be difﬁcult and intubation
        technically challenging.
      • i aspiration risk (d lower oesophageal pressure, i intragastric pressure)
        therefore securing deﬁnitive airway early is essential.
      • i O2 requirements in pregnancy, yet harder to ventilate (d chest
        compliance).
      • Chest compression is awkward (ﬂared ribs, raised diaphragm, obesity,
        breast hypertrophy).
      • Gravid uterus compresses inferior vena cava diminishing venous return.
      • There are 2 patients: mother and foetus.
      Approach to resuscitation
      Follow Resuscitation guidelines for managing adult cardiac arrest (b p.46).
      The special situation of pregnancy means some additional points apply.
      If there is advanced warning, think ahead. In addition to the usual team
      needed for airway control, IV access and chest compressions, organize:
      • An anaesthetist for the airway, an obstetrician to perform a Caesarian
         section and a paediatrician to resuscitate the baby.
      • The neonatal resuscitation equipment (overhead warmer, suction,
         airway equipment and oxygen).
      • A member of staff to apply cricoid pressure at the beginning of
         resuscitation and until the airway is secured.
      • A member of staff to manually displace the uterus to the left until a left
         lateral tilt has been established with a Cardiff wedge.
      It may take time for help to arrive and there may be no warning prior to
      patient arrival. In the meantime, proceed as follows:
      • Call the obstetrician, paediatrician, and ED consultant immediately.
      • Apply cricoid pressure (Sellick manoeuvre) at the beginning of
         resuscitation and until the airway is secured.
      • Aim to secure the airway with a cuffed tracheal tube at an early stage.
      • Decompress the inferior vena cava by either manual displacement of
         the uterus to the left, or the use of sandbags or a special 15° right lateral
         (‘Cardiff ’) wedge.
      • Consider and treat the cause (eg remember that hypovolaemic shock
         from unseen haemorrhage may respond to a large IV ﬂuid challenge).
      • If there is no return of spontaneous circulation within 5min perform a
         Caesarian section (providing the patient is >24 weeks pregnant).
                                    CARDIAC ARREST IN PREGNANCY               597

Emergency Caesarian section
Rationale After several minutes of maternal cardiac arrest the best chance
of survival for the foetus is to be removed from the now hostile hypoxic
environment of the uterus. Caesarian section also beneﬁts the mother by
decompressing the inferior vena cava, resulting in i venous return.
Procedure Continue closed chest compression and ventilation. Make
a midline skin incision from pubic symphysis to epigastrium. Incise the
underlying uterus vertically, starting 6cm above the bladder peritoneal
reﬂection. Continue the uterine incision upwards to the fundus, through
an anteriorly placed placenta if necessary. Speed is essential. Deliver the
baby, holding it head down and below the level of the mother’s abdomen.
Clamp and cut the umbilical cord. Resuscitate the baby (b p.642).
598    CHAPTER 13 Obstetrics and gynaecology

      Post-partum problems
      Physiology of the puerperium
      Within 24hr of delivery uterine involution results in the fundus being
      level with the umbilicus. By 2 weeks the uterus should be impalpable.
      Uterine discharge (‘lochia’) gradually d, but may last up to 6 weeks. An
      initially bloody discharge becomes yellow within 2 weeks. The external
      cervical os gradually closes so that after 1 week it no longer accepts
      a ﬁnger. Speculum examination will now reveal the typical parous os
      (see Fig. 13.4).
      Post-partum haemorrhage
      Primary Haemorrhage >500mL in the ﬁrst 24hr is often related to
      retained placenta/clots. This, together with uterine inversion and amniotic
      ﬂuid embolism are principally problems of the labour ward.
      Secondary Excessive fresh vaginal bleeding between 1 day and 6 weeks
      after a delivery affects 81% pregnancies. The most common cause is
      retained products of conception: uterine involution may be incomplete
      and USS may reveal the retained products. Other causes include
      intrauterine infection (see below), genital tract trauma, trophoblastic
      disease. Resuscitate appropriately for blood loss and refer. Severe
      bleeding may respond to IV oxytocin.
      Pyrexia
      Treat according to the underlying cause, which include the following:
      • Pelvic infection (see below).
      • UTI.
      • Mastitis.
      • Chest infection.
      • DVT or PE.
      • Illness apparently unrelated to pregnancy/delivery.
      Pelvic infection
      Involves a signiﬁcant threat: may be complicated by septicaemia, necro-
      tizing fasciitis, DIC or septic PE. There is an i risk with: surgical proce-
      dures in labour, prolonged membrane rupture, internal foetal monitoring,
      and repeated examinations.
      Features Uterine tenderness and subinvolution, pyrexia, offensive lochia,
      peritonitis.
      Send Vaginal swabs for culture, FBC, group and save, clotting screen and
      blood cultures.
      Resuscitate with O2 and IV ﬂuids and refer. For septic shock, follow
      severe sepsis guidelines, give IV co-amoxiclav (1.2g) and IV metronidazole
      (500mg), monitor CVP, consider inotropes and ventilation.
      Infected episiotomy wound
      Refer to obstetrician.
                                                POST-PARTUM PROBLEMS              599

Mastitis and breast abscess
Mastitis is commonly due to Staph. or Strep. Send milk for culture and
commence oral antibiotics (eg co-amoxiclav). Instruct patient to express
and discard milk from the affected breast, but to continue breast-feeding
from the other. Arrange GP follow-up.
Refer patients with abscesses for surgical drainage by incision or the now
preferred aspiration.
Psychiatric illness
Rapid hormonal swings are responsible for elation being frequently
replaced by tearfulness and anxiety (‘fourth day blues’). Less commonly
(0.5% pregnancies) puerperal psychosis occurs. Those with a previous psy-
chotic illness are at particular risk. Exclude sepsis and refer for psychiatric
help. The patient may need to be compulsorily detained (b Compulsory
hospitalization, p.628).
Thromboembolic disease
A major cause of maternal mortality throughout pregnancy and the
puerperium. Adopt a high index of suspicion and refer for investigation
(b Pulmonary embolus, p.120).

                      Nulliparous            Multiparous
Fig. 13.4 Appearance of the cervical os.
This page intentionally left blank
 Chapter 14                                                  601

Psychiatry

Approach to psychiatric problems                       602
Glossary of psychiatric terms                          603
The psychiatric interview                              604
Mental state examination                               606
The aggressive patient: background                     608
Safe consultations with potentially violent patients   609
Managing aggression                                    610
Emergency sedation of a violent patient                611
Deliberate self-harm                                   612
Assessment of suicide risk                             614
Mental health assessment issues                        615
Depression                                             616
Mania                                                  617
Schizophrenia                                          618
Complications of psychiatric drugs                     619
Munchausen’s syndrome                                  620
Medically unexplained symptoms                         621
Alcohol abuse                                          622
Acute alcohol intoxication                             623
Alcohol withdrawal                                     624
Alcohol-related brain injury                           625
Help for alcoholics                                    625
Drug and substance abuse                               626
Compulsory hospitalization                             628
Mental Capacity Act                                    629
602    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Approach to psychiatric problems
      Psychiatric presentations comprise 81–2% of ED new attendances. These
      patients are sometimes considered unwelcome because they are seen as
      complex, heavy consumers of staff time and energy, and not infrequently
      exhibit aggressive and/or disturbed behaviour. A careful systematic
      approach to patients presenting with psychiatric emergencies produces
      an accurate diagnosis in most cases. If this is not possible, the informa-
      tion gained will at least assist referral to the appropriate service, allowing
      management of the problem.
      Liaison psychiatry service
      Many EDs have close links with liaison psychiatrists and specialist psychi-
      atric nurses. These individuals are used to managing a variety of psychiatric
      problems, including overdose and deliberate self-harm. In an emergency
      situation, they can act as an important source of advice.
      Potential points of conﬂict
      The ED is not an ideal environment for the assessment of potential
      psychiatric illness. Remember the following:
      • The vast majority of aggressive, violent or bizarrely behaving patients in
        the ED are not suffering from a formal psychiatric illness. Many require
        the police, rather than psychiatric services.
      • Admission is not mandatory simply because a psychiatric illness has
        been diagnosed.
      • The presence of alcohol or drug intoxication makes any assessment of
        mental state very difﬁcult and in many cases impossible—do not assume
        that this in itself reﬂects an acute psychiatric problem.
      • Acute alcohol withdrawal is a medical emergency with a signiﬁcant
        mortality—refers to the medical team, not acutely to the psychiatric
        service.
      • Acute confusional states are usually organic rather than psychiatric in
        origin – investigate with this in mind.
      • An emergency Section form must be signed by the examining doctor,
        but this does not have to be a psychiatrist.
      Similarly, psychiatric staff within the ED need to consider the following:
      • EDs are under pressure to manage large numbers of patients in a timely
        fashion, so it may be difﬁcult for ED staff to spend large amounts of time
        with any single patient.
      • Lack of appropriate interview facilities may make it necessary to
        compromise patient privacy rather than the safety of staff.
      • A psychiatric referral can be appropriate in a patient who has
        consumed alcohol, if there is a signiﬁcant psychiatric history
        (‘Dual Diagnosis’).
      General approach to psychiatric problems
      Adopt the same approach of history taking and examination as with other
      general medical problems. Do not dismiss psychiatric patients as ‘mad,
      therefore the psychiatrist can sort them out’—this can result in misdiagnosis
      and inappropriate referral.
                                    GLOSSARY OF PSYCHIATRIC TERMS               603

Glossary of psychiatric terms
Concrete thinking Impairment of abstract, or symbolic thinking
(eg interpretation of proverbs, explanation of similarities).
Delirium An organic syndrome characterized by rapid onset global
disturbance of cognition, and disturbed consciousness.
Delusion A ﬁrm, usually false, belief unshakeable by logical argument or
contrary experiences and which is out of keeping with the patient’s social
or cultural norms.
Flight of ideas Thoughts rapidly cycle linked by chains of ideas or
verbal associations or sounds resulting in disjointed, or in extreme cases,
incomprehensible speech.
Hallucination A false perception not due to a sensory distortion or
misinterpretation, but which occurs at the same time as real perceptions.
Hallucinations can occur in each of the sensory modalities. Auditory
hallucinations are most commonly associated with psychiatric illness.
Visual and other hallucinatory phenomena suggest organic aetiology.
Ideas of reference A feeling that others are talking about or looking
at the patient for some reason. Insight is usually retained, which is not the
case in delusions of reference.
Obsession Recurrent, persistent, and intrusive thoughts, impulses or
mental images that the individual usually tries to resist, ﬁnds unpleasant
and recognizes as senseless.
Passivity An experience of being under external control either
physically, emotionally or intellectually. Suggests schizophrenia.
Perseveration Repetition of an idea, thought, speech or an action
beyond the point of relevance (eg giving the answer of an initial question
in response to subsequent unrelated questions). Pathognomonic of
organic brain disease.
Pressure of speech Rapid or hurried speech, often occurs with ﬂight
of ideas.
Psychosis Extreme disorders of thinking and perception, often involving
delusions and hallucinations, with loss of insight.
Thought blocking A feature of schizophrenia in which a train of
thought stops abruptly and, following a pause, a new line of conversation
begins.
Thought broadcasting More than simply feeling others can read
personal thoughts. An experience of thoughts spilling out beyond personal
control or that, thoughts are being relayed from external sources.
Thought insertion Thoughts that are not the patient’s own are put in
his mind from outside.
Thought withdrawal The feeling that thoughts have been removed or
stolen by an external inﬂuence.
604    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      The psychiatric interview
      Setting and safety
      Conduct the interview in a quiet, relatively private and preferably less
      clinical setting. Many EDs have speciﬁc facilities designed for this purpose
      (following speciﬁc joint guidance from the Royal College of Psychiatrists
      and British Association for Emergency Medicine – Council Report CR118,
      2004). Irrespective of this, do not under any circumstances allow the need
      for privacy to compromise your safety! Ensure that other staff are easily
      available and can be summoned immediately if necessary. If this is not
      possible, either conduct the interview within the main ED (in a cubicle
      or side-room) and/or ensure that other staff are present during the
      interview. Position yourself between the patient and the exit.
      Approach
      In the initial interview, focus upon the following:
      • Listen in supportive fashion and obtain an accurate history of the
         presenting problem.
      • Assess the mental state, emotions, and attitudes of the patient.
      • Make a formulation (identify the key factors of the present illness, list
         probable causes, explain why the patient became ill, and plan treat-
         ment).
      Initial history
      Take a rapid, thorough history, concentrating upon the following
      questions:
      • What is the presenting complaint?
      • What factors have caused the patient to present here and now?
      • Is there a past history of psychiatric illness or medication?
      • What does the patient want (advice, treatment or admission)?
      • Are the patient’s wishes appropriate?
      Ethnic minorities
      Be aware of the different communities living within the vicinity and take
      special care to remain sensitive to their needs. Assessment of mental
      health problems needs to take into account the relevant cultural and
      religious issues.
      Language
      It can be particularly challenging to assess the mental health of patients
      who do not speak English. The following solutions may be explored:
      • Assessment may be performed by an ED or mental health professional
         who speaks the patient’s language (the ideal result).
      • A health professional from another discipline acts as an interpreter.
      • An interpreter who is not a health professional, but who is trained in
         mental health issues may be used.
      Note that children should not be used as interpreters. Similarly, it is not
      good practice to rely upon family members to interpret.
                                         THE PSYCHIATRIC INTERVIEW             605

Taking a full psychiatric history
The extent to which a detailed psychiatric history is required in the ED
varies according to the circumstances. The key features of a psychiatric
history are:
Presenting complaint List the principal complaints and try to detail the
course and severity of each. Ask about the effect of each problem on the
person’s life and work. Carefully determine how he came to be referred
or why he presented here and now. When was he last well?
Past psychiatric history Ask about previous psychiatric or physical illness,
hospital admissions (particularly if compulsory) and any outpatient
contact (eg community psychiatric nurse), day hospital, day centres, or
crisis intervention groups. Record psychiatric or other medications as
accurately as possible.
Personal and family history Obtain an outline of the patient’s life
history: birth, childhood, circumstances of upbringing (including parental
relationships—marital disharmony, separation, violence, adoption, single
parent, brought up by a grandparent, etc.). Ask about education, academic
achievements, and relationships with family or friends. Ask if there has
been any recent bereavement and what effect this has had.
Work history Is the patient employed? If not, ask about any previous
jobs. Ask about the impact of any loss, change, or failure in work on the
patient’s life or mental status, and conversely determine if psychiatric or
other illness has had any effect on employment.
Sexual/marital history Gently enquire about relationships and sexual
experiences only where relevant. This may reveal important information
about the patient’s personality and relationships to others. It may form
a major part of the presenting complaint (eg recent ending or change in
a relationship or a history of sexual abuse). A more detailed account of
sexual aberration or fantasy may be required in a forensic examination.
Substance misuse Try to estimate alcohol, tobacco, drug, or other
substance misuse by the patient. Although it may be difﬁcult to obtain
accurate information, do not assume that patients always underestimate
their consumption of such substances.
Forensic history Record any previous criminal charges, convictions or
contact with the police, including the dates on which they occurred.
Ask if the patient has any present charges or court actions pending
against him.
Social circumstances Determine where the patient lives and if he shares
accommodation with others. Enquire about income and how he is coping
ﬁnancially. Ask if there are any dependents, any outstanding debts, and if
he is receiving any form of social support or monetary assistance.
Personality Try to describe the patient’s usual and present mood. How
does he feel about himself and about other people? How does he enjoy
himself and how does he react to good, bad or stressful events?
Corroboration Extremely important information can be gathered from
close relatives, GPs, community, or social services, and should be sought
to verify or enhance information obtained directly from the patient.
606    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Mental state examination
      Having taken an appropriately thorough history, make an assessment of
      the patient’s mental state. If the patient is violent, disturbed, or for some
      other reason unable to provide background history, the information or
      observations gathered, whilst assessing mental state become even more
      crucial to diagnosis.
      Appearance and behaviour
      Gather information from the moment the interview begins. Is the patient
      appropriately dressed; is he clean and tidy, or neglected? Does his general
      posture, body movement, and facial expression suggest fear, anxiety,
      aggression, withdrawal, detachment, or low mood? Does he maintain
      eye contact? Does he respond appropriately to external stimuli or is he
      easily distracted? Does he appear to be hallucinating or responding to no
      obvious stimuli? Are there any abnormal movements, tics, grimaces, or
      dystonic movements? Note whether behaviour is steady and consistent,
      or labile and unpredictable.
      Speech
      Describe the rate, volume, intonation, and spontaneity of speech. Note
      the presence of dysarthria or dysphasia. Record any examples of invented
      new words (neologisms), unusual phrases, perseveration, or garbled
      speech verbatim. Note vagueness, over-preciseness, or sudden switching
      to new themes or subjects (ﬂight of ideas).
      Mood
      Taking cues from appearance and behaviour, enquire about the patient’s
      prevailing mood, opinion of himself, and view of the future. Enquire about
      suicidal thoughts and thoughts of harm to others. Ask about disturbances
      in sleep, appetite, libido, concentration, and mood variations during a
      typical day. Ask about irritability or memory disturbance (particularly of
      short-term memory).
      Thought abnormalities
      These are best recorded as they are found during the interview
      (eg thought blocking or ﬂight of ideas). Test for concrete thinking by asking
      the patient to interpret a simple proverb. Ideas of reference or perse-
      cutory delusions may require direct enquiry to be revealed (eg asking
      about neighbours, electrical devices). Similarly, passivity phenomena may
      require speciﬁc questioning to be elicited (eg Is anyone making you think
      or move without you wanting to?)
      Hallucinations
      Record the presence of any hallucinations including their nature and spe-
      ciﬁc content. Visual, olfactory, gustatory and tactile hallucinations should
      prompt suspicion of organic, rather than psychiatric disease.
      Insight and mental capacity
      Does he believe he is ill, does he think he requires treatment and would
      he be willing to accept it? Does he have mental capacity (b p.615)?
                                           MENTAL STATE EXAMINATION                 607

Assessment of risk
Consider whether the patient and/or others are at any risk of harm. Ask if
the patient has any thoughts of self-harm and/or harm to other individuals.
Establish if there is any past history of self-harm or violence. Try to decide
if the patient is at risk of abuse/neglect and consider whether he may be a
‘vulnerable adult’—such concerns should trigger a Safeguarding Alert.
Children at risk
Find out if there are any children in the patient’s household and, if so,
whether or not there are satisfactory arrangements in place to care for
them. Concerns should prompt consideration of involvement of Social
Services and/or Child Protection referral.
Physical examination
A physical examination completes any psychiatric evaluation. Speciﬁcally
check for evidence of those physical illnesses which can be associated with
psychiatric disturbance (eg thyroid disease, substance withdrawal, head
injury, epilepsy, cerebrovascular disease, or other intracranial pathology).
Carefully examine for focal neurological signs, meningism, organic confu-
sional states, intoxication, and injury. In acute psychological disturbance,
perform and record the following basic observations and investigations
(this may prove to be very difﬁcult in violent or aggressive individuals):
• Baseline pulse, respiratory rate, BP and SpO2.
• Temperature (T)°.
• BMG/blood glucose.
• Urinalysis.
• Breath alcohol.
Undertake other investigations such as U&E, FBC, CXR, or CT scanning
if clinically relevant. Urine drug screening, TFTs or electroencephalogram
may be indicated in some situations, but are rarely available acutely.
Cognitive assessment
Although the psychiatric interview will, in general, reveal information
about a patient’s cognitive abilities, a formal evaluation of higher mental
function is essential. Failure to do this can lead to organic brain disease
being falsely labelled as a ‘functional’ or purely psychiatric illness, resulting
in inappropriate treatment. Assess the following:
• Level of consciousness (eg alert, hyperalert, withdrawn, or comatose).
• Orientation.
• Attention and concentration.
• Registration of new information.
• Recall of recent and distant memories.
• Ability to interpret instructions and carry out tasks.
The Mini-Mental State Examination
The Mini-Mental State Examination was designed as a screening tool for
the assessment of cognitive function in the elderly. It is in widespread use,
but note that as with many psychological tests, it is subject to copyright.
608    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      The aggressive patient: background
      A signiﬁcant (albeit small) proportion of patients exhibit aggressive
      behaviour towards staff (and others) who are attempting to help them.
      Sometimes this amounts to physical violence. It is vital that all ED staff
      receive appropriate training in this area, bearing in mind that recogni-
      tion and prevention of aggression is just as important as knowing how to
      manage it when it occurs.
      Underlying causes
      Medical illness
      Recognize that a patient’s agitation or aggression may be because of an
      underlying treatable acute medical condition. Such conditions may be
      compounded (as well as being potentially caused) by the use of alcohol
      and/or illicit drugs:
      • Hypoglycaemia (b p.150).
      • Head injury.
      • Hypoxia (any cause).
      • Distended bladder.
      • Post-ictal confusional states (epilepsy or drug overdose).
      • Organic brain syndromes (eg acute confusional states—b p.134).
      Psychiatric illness
      Most violent, aggressive, or bizarre patients in the ED are not mentally
      ill. Violence resulting directly from psychiatric illness, which needs urgent
      treatment is relatively uncommon. It is restricted to a small number of
      patients and tends to be associated with the following:
      • A past history of violent behaviour.
      • Schizophrenia and other psychoses (eg mania or paranoid disorders),
          especially when there are delusions or hallucinations that focus upon
          one particular individual.
      • Personality disorder, particularly sociopathic, impulsive, or explosive
          disorders.
      • Learning disability.
      Warning signs of impending violence
      Violent episodes can frequently be predicted and often prevented. The
      experienced practitioner may be able to spot the signs of approaching
      trouble at an earlier stage. Warning signs include the following:
      • Angry facial expressions, gestures, and posture (aggressive body
        language).
      • Restlessness, overt irritation, discontentment, pacing about,
        over-arousal (dilated pupils, tachycardia, increased respiratory rate).
      • Prolonged eye contact.
      • Loud speech and changes in tone of voice.
      • Verbally threatening and/or reporting feelings of anger/violence.
      • Repeating behaviour, which has previously preceded violent episodes.
      • Blocking escape routes.
   SAFE CONSULTATIONS WITH POTENTIALLY VIOLENT PATIENTS                         609

Safe consultations with potentially
violent patients
Planning before the consultation
Physical design issues
Many departments have specially designed facilities with the interview
room door designed to open outwards in order to allow rapid, easy exit.
It is important to regard any loose items as potential weapons
(eg telephones, chairs, lamps).
Safety ﬁrst
Safety comes ﬁrst—ensure that patients are not allowed to harm them-
selves, other patients, or staff. Aim to conduct the consultation in a quiet,
comfortable and, preferably, non-clinical area. However, compromise
privacy, rather than safety, so if there are concerns, it may be necessary to
undertake the consultation in a standard cubicle. Consider having another
member of staff present during the consultation. Before consulting with
any potentially violent patient ensure the following:
• Other staff know where you are and who you are with.
• You know how to get help (a ‘panic button’ or other personal alarm).
• Staff know to respond immediately.
• Staff know what to do if there is a problem.
Information gathering
Obtain as much information as possible beforehand. Useful sources of
information may include relatives, police, social services, GP, and other
health professionals.
The consultation
The outcome of the consultation depends heavily upon how it is conducted:
• Ensure that your own body language does not provoke the situation.
• Remain calm and sympathetic, maintaining a reassuring and non-
  judgmental manner.
• Listen to any immediate complaint or grievance with a minimum of
  interruption.
• Engage in conversation, with continuing reassurances that you are there
  to help.
• Adopt an attentive, but relaxed posture.
• Speak slowly and clearly, keeping your voice low.
• Avoid excessive eye contact.
• Sit between the patient and the door and not directly facing the patient
  (as this may appear confrontational and will provide a larger target for
  attack).
• Never turn your back on the patient, particularly when leaving the
  room.
610    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Managing aggression
      Violent behaviour is unusual if a calm, sensible approach is followed. If vio-
      lence does occur, focus upon preventing the patient from harming other
      patients/relatives, staff, or themselves. See www.nice.org.uk
      Approach to the aggressive patient
      Get immediate help from police/security ofﬁcers and other staff. Avoid
      physical confrontation, and ensure that you position yourself within the
      examination room or cubicle with no block to your escape. Take note of
      where the alarm buttons are situated. Continue de-escalation techniques.
      • Find out what the problem is, establish a rapport and encourage
        reasoning.
      • Show concern and stay attentive.
      • Avoid patronizing comments. Never insult the patient, or make
        promises or commitments that cannot be kept.
      • Direct body contact can be misinterpreted.
      • Do not engage in prolonged eye contact.
      • Remember that psychotic patients have different perceptions of
        personal space and may feel threatened by staff coming into what would
        otherwise be a normal and non-threatening distance.
      • Try to maintain a calm atmosphere with a non-critical, non-domineering
        approach.
      Management of physical violence
      If physical violence occurs, safety of staff, other patients, and relatives
      takes priority. Concern for property is secondary—it can be replaced.
      Even during a violent act, a calm approach with talking and listening often
      prevents escalation of the event and the need for physical confrontation.
      Physical restraint Avoid physical intervention if at all possible. Where
      physical restraint is required, use the minimum degree of force, applied for
      the minimum length of time in order to control the episode. Apply it in a
      manner that attempts to calm, rather than provoke, further aggression.
      This will require sufﬁcient members of staff to control the event without
      injury to anyone involved.
      Restrain the patient by holding clothing rather than limbs. If limbs have to
      be grasped, hold near a major joint to reduce leverage and the possibility
      of fracture or dislocation. Remove the patient’s shoes or boots. In
      exceptional circumstances (eg when a patient is biting) the hair may have
      to be held ﬁrmly. Never apply pressure to the neck, throat, chest, back,
      pelvis or abdomen. Do not deliberately inﬂict pain.
      Do not attempt restraint unless sufﬁcient staff/expertise is available. Put
      one person in charge to ensure airway and breathing are not compromised
      and vital signs are monitored. Only d restraint once it is certain that the
      risk has d—this may mean use of medication.
      Weapons Ask for any weapon to be placed in a ‘neutral’ position,
      rather than handed over. Do not attempt to remove a weapon from an
      aggressor.
                     EMERGENCY SEDATION OF A VIOLENT PATIENT                     611

Emergency sedation of a violent patient
Pharmacological restraint using sedative drugs is a last resort, and should
only be given on the advice of senior and experienced staff. Emergency
sedation carries signiﬁcant dangers. Sedative drugs may mask important
signs of underlying illness, eg an intracranial haematoma requiring urgent
treatment. The normal protective reﬂexes (including airway reﬂexes, such
as gag and cough response) will be suppressed. Respiratory depression
and the need for tracheal intubation and IPPV may develop. Adverse car-
diovascular events (eg hypotension and arrhythmias) may be provoked,
particularly in a struggling, hypoxic individual. Finally, staff need to be
aware of medicolegal implications of carrying out any restraint.
Oral tranquillization
If possible sedative drugs should be given orally, rather than by injection,
but oral treatment may not be feasible in a violent and disturbed patient.
• Give lorazepam (1–2 mg PO) if there is no psychotic context.
• Give lorazepam (1–2 mg PO) + antipsychotic (eg haloperidol 1.5–3mg
   PO) if there is a psychotic context.
• Allow sufﬁcient time for response before considering a second dose.
IM tranquillization
If oral therapy inappropriate (refused, failed or not indicated).
• Give lorazepam (2–4 mg intramuscular (IM) in non-psychotic context).
• Give lorazepam (2–4 mg IM) + antipsychotic (eg haloperidol 5–10mg IM)
   if there is a psychotic context. When using haloperidol ensure
   procyclidine is immediately available to treat acute dystonia or other
   extrapyramidal side-effects.
• Allow sufﬁcient time for response before considering a second dose.
• Avoid IM diazepam, chlorpromazine or thioridazine.
IV tranquillization
Only in truly exceptional circumstances, when immediate tranquillization
is essential, IV drugs may be used (ideally after senior consultation):
Consider IV benzodiazepine or IV haloperidol.
Avoid parenteral clomethiazole, barbiturates, and paraldehyde, as they
are associated with a signiﬁcant risk of respiratory depression.
See NICE Clinical Guideline 25 on ‘Violence’
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG25/QuickRefGuide/pdf/English
After the violent episode
Following any episode of verbal aggression or physical violence, ensure
that the staff involved record full detailed notes and that standard local
incident forms are completed. Report the episode to the senior member
of staff and to the police (as appropriate), if they are not already involved.
Subsequently, when dealing with the violent patient, do not purposely
avoid the patient or treat him obviously differently, since this will merely
emphasize concepts of his own unacceptability and may lead to further
aggression.
612    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Deliberate self-harm
      Deliberate self-harm (DSH) accounts for 820% of acute medical admissions
      in the UK. Psychiatric symptoms are often associated with DSH, but tend
      to be transient and predominantly related to social or emotional factors.
      Psychiatric illness is relatively uncommon (85–8% of cases, mostly depres-
      sion). 890% of DSH involve self-poisoning, the remainder physical self-
      injury (eg cutting). Most DSH episodes are impulsive (considered for <1hr
      beforehand). Associated alcohol consumption is common and may have
      precipitated the event. However, assess carefully—1% of DSH patients do
      commit suicide within a year. Some hospitals admit DSH patients to an ED
      observation ward, allowing alcohol to wear off until the situation can be
      properly assessed. Useful guidance on the treatment and management of
      self-harm in EDs has been published by NICE (www.nice.org.uk).
      Triage
      Patients who present following an episode of physical self-harm and/or
      overdose require rapid initial assessment (triage) in order to establish the
      degree of urgency of the situation, mental capacity, and willingness to stay,
      distress levels, and presence of mental illness. Factors that may render the
      situation more urgent include:
      • Need for urgent treatment for physical injury and/or overdose.
      • Immediate risk of violence to others.
      • Immediate risk of further self-harm.
      • Need for treatment, but patient threatening to leave.
      Australian Mental Health Triage Scale
      This combined physical and mental health triage scale is recommended
      by NICE and can be adapted for easy use (see www.rcpsych.ac.uk). Some
      features are summarized in the Table 14.1.

       Table 14.1 The Australian Mental Health Triage Scale
       Triage         Features
       category
       1 Extremely    Violent, possessing a weapon, or further self-harm in the ED
         urgent
       2 Very         Extremely agitated/restless, aggressive, confused/unable to
         urgent       cooperate, or requiring restraint
       3 Urgent       Agitated/restless, bizarre behaviour, psychotic symptoms, severe
                      depression and/or anxiety
       4 Less urgent Symptoms of anxiety and/or depression without suicidal ideation
       5 Least urgent Compliant, cooperative and communicative

      There should be a system in place so that self-harm patients are checked
      upon at least every hour—a change in triage category may require more
      urgent assessment.
                                                 DELIBERATE SELF-HARM           613

Management plan
All patients who present to the ED after self-harm should be offered a
psychosocial assessment of needs and risk by an appropriately trained indi-
vidual. Some units continue to admit all patients with DSH for psychiatric
appraisal once medically ﬁt, but sheer numbers can make this difﬁcult.
A selective approach distinguishes patients with underlying psychiatric
pathology and/or true suicidal intent—both requiring formal psychiatric
evaluation. Many centres have developed psychiatric liaison services with
medical and nursing mental health specialists who can offer timely and
expert input.
Assessment
Involve family/carers whenever possible, with the patient’s consent.
Focus upon:
• Events and circumstances leading up to the episode of self-harm.
• Preparation, concealment, and true intention of a DSH act.
• Outcome of DSH act (eg unintended danger or accidental discovery).
• Current stresses, ﬁnancial, legal, or interpersonal problems.
• Alcohol or substance misuse.
• Previous self-harm or psychiatric illness.
Decide about psychiatric referral using this information. If in doubt, refer.
Also refer immediately any child or adolescent who presents with DSH.
Many EDs have a system whereby patients who are not deemed to be
at immediate risk can return the following day for an appointment with
a psychiatric liaison nurse/specialist for psychosocial assessment. In the
absence of such a system, ensure that the patient’s GP receives written
communication about the patient’s ED attendance and discharge.
Factors suggesting suicidal intent
• Careful preparation (eg saving tablets) and/or signiﬁcant premeditation.
• Final acts (eg organizing ﬁnances, insurance or a will).
• Carrying out DSH alone, secretly or when unlikely to be discovered.
• Not seeking help following DSH.
• A deﬁnite, sustained wish to die.
Suicide notes can be important, but are sometimes left for dramatic effect
and so are not always reliable indicators.
Consider all self-harm acts by individuals aged >65 years to be evidence of
suicidal intent until proved otherwise.
Risk of further self-harm
Recurrence is most likely if there have been repeated previous episodes
(eg habitual self-cutters or recurrent overdoses).
Socio-demographic predictors include being single or separated, aged 25–
54 years, being unemployed or social class V.
Other factors include drug or alcohol dependence, a history of criminal
behaviour, previous psychiatric treatment, or the presence of a personality
disorder.
614    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Assessment of suicide risk
      Prevention of suicide is a primary aim in assessing DSH. Certain factors
      are common among completed suicides and are signiﬁcant if found in a
      DSH patient:
      • Male.
      • Elderly (particularly female).
      • Living alone.
      • Separated, divorced, or widowed.
      • Unemployed or retired.
      • Physical illness (eg painful, debilitating, or terminal conditions).
      • Psychiatric illness (especially schizophrenia and depression).
      • Alcoholism.
      • Sociopathic personality disorder.
      • Violent method of DSH (eg hanging, shooting, drowning, or high fall).
      Modiﬁed Sad Persons Scale
      It can be difﬁcult for clinicians without a psychiatric background to make an
      assessment of the suicide risk. The modiﬁed ‘Sad Persons Scale’ attempts
      to assist non-psychiatrists with this task. It may serve as a guide regarding
      the need for referral or admission (Table 14.2).

       Table 14.2 Modiﬁed Sad Persons Scale
                                                                        Score
       Sex male                                                         1
       Age <19 or >45 years.                                            1
       Depression or hopelessness                                       2
       Previous suicide attempts or psychiatric care                    1
       Excessive alcohol or drug use                                    1
       Rational thinking loss (psychotic or organic illness)            2
       Separated, widowed, or divorced                                  1
       Organized or serious attempt                                     2
       No social support                                                1
       Stated future intent (determined to repeat or ambivalent)        2

      Interpretation of total score
      Score <6 may be safe to discharge (depending upon circumstances).
      Score 6–8 probably requires psychiatric consultation.
      Score >8 probably requires hospital admission.
                                 MENTAL HEALTH ASSESSMENT ISSUES               615

Mental health assessment issues
Patients who present with deliberate self-harm can present difﬁcult prob-
lems that are not often a feature of patients who do not have mental
health problems. The management of some of these issues is addressed by
NICE (www.nice.org.uk) and summarized below.
Timing of psychosocial assessment
The ideal is to offer psychosocial assessment of patients with DSH as
soon as possible. There are occasions when this assessment needs to be
delayed, including the following:
• Life-saving treatment for physical injuries is needed.
• The patient is unconscious and/or signiﬁcantly under inﬂuence of
  alcohol/drugs and, therefore, not capable of being properly assessed.
Patient threatening to leave the department
Not infrequently, patients state that they wish to leave the department
before psychosocial assessment. Very often, it is possible to persuade
them to stay. Perform an assessment of the patient’s mental capacity and
mental illness to decide whether it is necessary to detain him/her under
the Mental Capacity Act or Mental Health Act if he/she attempts to leave.
Diminished mental capacity and/or signiﬁcant mental illness
If there is diminished mental capacity and/or signiﬁcant mental illness,
refer for urgent mental health assessment and prevent the patient from
leaving the department. If the patient does manage to leave the depart-
ment despite best efforts, contact the police in order to try to bring him/
her back.
No reduction in mental capacity and no signiﬁcant mental illness
If there is no reduction in mental capacity and no signiﬁcant mental illness
and the patient leaves the department, pass information on to his/her GP
and to the relevant mental health services as soon as possible, to enable
rapid follow up.
Physical treatments
Management of poisoning is the focus of Chapter 4. Note that it is
sensible to measure paracetamol levels in any patient who presents with a
history of overdose of paracetamol and/or other drugs.
Superﬁcial skin wounds <5cm long are often managed satisfactorily with
tissue adhesive strips. Deeper skin wounds, or those >5cm in length
require standard assessment and treatment (b Wound management,
p.406).
Repeat self-harmers
There may be local organizations to help self-harmers, as well as national
organizations, such as the Samaritans (a listening service). Speciﬁc advice
for people who repeatedly self-injure includes advice and instruction on
harm minimization issues, self-management of superﬁcial injuries, and
dealing with scar tissue.
616    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Depression
      Everyone experiences low mood at times. It needs treatment when pro-
      longed, unrelenting, inappropriate or disabling. Lifetime risk of depression
      is 810% for men and 820% for women. General population prevalence is
      3–6% (i with age). Co-existing psychiatric or physical illness can make the
      diagnosis of depression difﬁcult. Conversely, depression may be the pre-
      senting feature of physical illness (eg hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome,
      or malignancy). 815% of those with recurrent affective disorder eventually
      commit suicide. Persisting suicidal ideation or recent DSH, even if trivial, is
      highly signiﬁcant in the presence of a diagnosis of depression.
      Aetiology
      Complex, with genetic, social, environmental, and neurochemical factors.
      Mood disorders are more common in relatives of depressives. Life events
      involving loss (partner, friend, health, job, status) can precipitate depres-
      sion (risk i to 6× normal in 6 months after such an event). Loss of a
      parent in childhood, unemployment, and lack of conﬁding relationship
      with a partner i vulnerability. Neurochemical mechanisms are involved
      (‘amine theory’). Effective antidepressants i brain availability of serotonin
      and noradrenaline.
      Presentation and symptoms
      Depressed patients almost always have persistent low mood, loss of
      interest and enjoyment (anhedonia) and lack of energy. Mood is unaffected
      by circumstances. Look for common features (Table 14.3).
       Table 14.3 Common features indicating a person’s mood
       Common symptoms                             Somatic or vegetative symptoms
       d Self-esteem and self-conﬁdence            Sleep disturbance
       d Concentration and attention               d Appetite
       Memory disturbance (esp short-term)         Weight loss
       Bleak and pessimistic views of the future   Constipation
       Ideas of self-harm or suicide               Amenorrhoea
       Feelings of guilt or worthlessness          Loss of interest or enjoyment

      Look for self-neglect. Does the patient exhibit psychomotor retardation
      (slow movements and speech) or is he agitated? Is eye contact maintained?
      Are there deﬁcits of short-term memory and cognition that improve with
      i effort? Psychotic symptoms occur in very severe cases (eg hallucinations
      or delusions). These are mood congruent: derogatory voices, ideas of
      poverty, guilt, nihilism (patient believes he has no bowel, no clothes, no
      life, etc.). Anxiety can be a feature of depression.
      Atypical depression can involve reversal of usual somatic symptoms leading
      to i appetite, i weight, hypersomnia, and reversed diurnal mood variation.
      Treatment
      Arrange psychiatric assessment for patients with severe depression, suicidal
      ideation, or psychotic features. Most respond to antidepressants, but do
      not start these in the ED. Some patients also require antipsychotics or
      ECT. In cases with psychotic features or where there is a high risk of death
      from suicide or profound self-neglect, ECT is effective.
      Mild/moderate cases may respond to psychological therapy. Counselling
      can help speciﬁc problems (eg bereavement or marital difﬁculties).
                                                                       MANIA       617

Mania
Mania and hypomania are less common than other mood disorders, but
more often require compulsory hospital admission. Pathologically elevated
mood combines with over-activity, irrationality, poor judgement and lack of
insight (see Table 14.4 for primary and other features). This leads to severe
disruption of relationships, employment or ﬁnances. Untreated, high rates
of divorce, debt, violence, or suicide occur. Onset may be acute or insidious.
Manic disorders can arise spontaneously or follow depressive illness, stress,
surgery, infection, or childbirth. Antidepressant medication, ECT, steroids,
and amphetamines can all precipitate mania, as can lithium withdrawal.
 Table 14.4 Primary and other features of mania
 Primary features                Other features
 Over-cheerfulness               Irritability
 Over-talkativeness              Flight of ideas
 Over-activity                   Distractibility
                                 Grandiosity
                                 d Requirement for sleep
                                 Delusions (mood-congruent)
                                 Hallucinations
                                 Impaired judgement
                                 Irresponsibility and impetuousness
                                 Gambling and promiscuity

Hypomania denotes an intermediate state without                       delusions,
hallucinations or complete disruption of normal activities.
Differential diagnosis
Schizophrenia can present with disorganized behaviour, violent
excitement, delusions, and incomprehensible speech. The content of
delusions (ie bizarre, rather than mood-congruent), will help distinguish
this from mania.
Approach to the patient
Stay calm and non-confrontational. Beware infectious optimism, which can
easily lead to underestimating the severity of illness or the requirement
for admission. Seek additional information from relatives. Irritability can be
the dominant symptom of mania and may be expressed as a savage, highly
detailed catalogue of the interviewer’s shortcomings. Irritable patients can
become angry or violent in the face of even minor frustrations.
Treatment
Overt manic illness is best managed in hospital to avoid behaviour harmful
to the patient or others. Insight is often d or absent, so compulsory
admission may be required. Liaise with the psychiatrist before commencing
deﬁnitive drug treatment as this may adversely affect assessment. Lithium
carbonate is traditional and effective in most cases, both to treat the
acute episode and as prophylaxis against recurrent mania. However, it
usually takes some days to work, so an antipsychotic (eg olanzapine) or
benzodiazepine may be needed initially.
618    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Schizophrenia
      This affects all areas of personal function, including thought content and
      process, perception, speech, mood, motivation and behaviour. A common
      pattern is acute exacerbation with i residual handicap between episodes.
      30% of those who suffer a ﬁrst episode never have another. Another 30%
      develop chronic symptoms requiring frequent admission or long-term
      care. The lifetime risk is 1/100.
      Clinical features
      No single symptom is pathognomonic: hallucinations or delusions simply
      conﬁrm psychosis.
      Schneider’s First Rank Symptoms originally suggested schizophrenia in the
      absence of organic disorder. It is now acknowledged that they can occur
      in mania and other conditions:
      • Auditory hallucinations ≥2 voices discussing the subject in the third
         person or giving a running commentary on his/her thoughts/behaviour.
      • Thought withdrawal, insertion, or broadcasting.
      • Somatic passivity sensations, emotions, or actions are externally imposed
         or controlled.
      • Delusional perception a genuine perception takes on abnormal signiﬁ-
         cance for the subject and is the basis of their delusional system.
      • Gedankenlautwerden voices repeating the subject’s thoughts out loud or
         anticipating the subject’s thoughts.
      Diagnosis
      Mental state examination will help to exclude organic and affective
      disorders, remembering:
      • Non-auditory hallucinations are more common in organic conditions.
      • Delusions in depression and mania are mood-congruent.
      Differential diagnoses
      Organic causes: temporal lobe epilepsy, drug-induced states, alcoholic
      hallucinosis, cerebral tumour, encephalitis, head injury.
      Psychiatric: affective psychoses, schizo-affective disorder, psychogenic
      psychosis, delusional disorder (eg infestation), personality disorder.
      Management
      Patients not known to have schizophrenia
      Refer to the psychiatric team who will advise about the need for urgent
      antipsychotic treatment.
      Patients known to have schizophrenia
      Schizophrenics frequently present to the ED with mental health issues
      and problems. It can be difﬁcult to formulate a management plan
      unless relevant background information is available. Liaise with relevant
      individuals (including community psychiatric nurse and psychiatrist) to
      decide whether to treat in hospital or in the community and what form
      any treatment should take.
                           COMPLICATIONS OF PSYCHIATRIC DRUGS                  619

Complications of psychiatric drugs
Antipsychotic drugs
Acute dystonic reactions (grimacing, facial, and masseter spasm, deviated
gaze, torticollis, limb rigidity, and behavioural disturbances) frequently
present to EDs. They follow ingestion of antipsychotics (eg phenothiazines
or haloperidol) and/or other drugs (eg metoclopramide), even in
therapeutic dosages. Reactions can occur up to 1 week after ingestion.
Acute dystonia can dislocate the mandible. Dystonia can be mistaken for
malingering, as symptoms can be brieﬂy interrupted by voluntary actions.
Once diagnosed, treat with:
Procyclidine 5 mg IV bolus, repeated as necessary after a few minutes.
Dramatic resolution of symptoms occurs within minutes, conﬁrming the
diagnosis. Symptoms may recur—treat with oral procyclidine 5mg every
8hr. Large doses of procyclidine cause euphoria and ﬁxed dilated pupils,
hence, its abuse by some patients. Diazepam also works, but is less speciﬁc
and carries risks of excessive drowsiness or respiratory depression.
Clozapine
An atypical antipsychotic used in treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
Agranulocytosis occurs in 3% of patients. For this reason, all patients are
enrolled with the Clozaril Patient Monitoring Service (telephone 0845 769
8269) who supervise regular blood screening. Check FBC for neutropenia
in any patient presenting with fever, sore throat, or other infection.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
MAOIs (eg phenelzine, tranylcypromine), irreversibly block enzymes
responsible for oxidative metabolism of 5HT, noradrenaline, tyramine,
and other amines. Once discontinued, enzyme inhibition continues
for up to 2 weeks, during which time other drugs should not be intro-
duced. Newer, reversible MAOIs (‘RIMAs’—eg moclobemide) cease to
have effects after 24–48hr. MAOIs cause postural hypotension, but acute
hypertensive reactions follow ingestion of amine rich foods (eg BovrilTM,
MarmiteTM, cheese, red wine). Noradrenaline release causes vasocon-
striction, tachycardia, and hypertension that can, in severe cases, lead to
intracerebral or subarachnoid haemorrhage. Similar hypertensive crises
can be caused by concurrent use of L-dopa, sympathomimetics, ampheta-
mine, or drinking certain low-alcohol beers or wines.
Lithium
Lithium toxicity presents with severe nausea, vomiting, cerebellar signs, or
confusion. SSRIs (eg ﬂuoxetine), anticonvulsants, antipsychotics, diuretics,
methyldopa, and calcium channel blockers can all precipitate toxicity.
Look for tremor, cerebellar ataxia, muscular twitching (myoclonus), spasti-
city, choreiform movements, up-going plantar responses, incoordination,
slurred speech, impaired concentration, drowsiness, coma.
Check serum lithium (plain, not lithium heparin tube!) and U&E
immediately. Serum lithium levels correspond poorly with clinical signs
(toxicity can occur within therapeutic range), so diagnosis of toxicity is
based on clinical observations. Stop lithium and treat according to severity
of toxicity (b p.197).
620    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Munchausen’s syndrome
      Also known as ‘hospital hopper’, this is characterized by recurrent hospital
      admissions with factitious symptoms and signs of physical illness. Other basic
      components are a morbid attraction to the sick role, pathological lying and
      pleasure from deceiving medical staff. The incidence is unknown, but it is prob-
      ably underestimated. It is believed to be commoner in men with peak onset at
      30–40 years. There may be an underlying personality disorder, but true psy-
      chiatric illness is rare. Origins are uncertain: excessive dependency, inability to
      form trusting relationships, attention-seeking, childhood hospitalization, and
      resentment of doctors for previous treatment have all been suggested.
      Presentation
      Common presentations involve detailed and convincing descriptions of
      cardiac chest pain, abdominal pain (especially pancreatitis), haematemesis,
      haemoptysis, rectal bleeding, haematuria, or pyrexia. More rarely, patients
      present with artefactual dermatitis or with a dramatic history of trauma
      (eg fall or pedestrian knockdown). Distinguish Munchausen’s from:
      • Malingering: fabricating illness for deﬁnite gain (eg stealing drugs, avoid-
        ing court appearance, faking symptoms to obtain opioids).
      • Somatoform disorders: physical symptoms or signs without organic cause,
        but not under voluntary control.
      • Fabricated and induced illness: see b p.733.
      Suspicious features
      • Incomplete or inconsistent disclosure of personal details and past history.
      • Patient a long way from home area for unclear reasons.
      • Recent dramatic history of myocardial infarction (MI), surgery, or
        complications elsewhere.
      • Excellent knowledge of ﬁner details of past treatment and/or complications.
      • Multiple scars: laparotomies, sternotomy, venous cutdowns.
      • Elaborate history of allergy (eg allergic to all painkillers except pethidine).
      • Unconvincing claims of medical or paramedical occupation.
      • Unusual/demanding behaviour and/or avoidance of eye contact.
      • No ascertainable organic cause for the symptoms.
      Management
      Early recognition is important, but ﬁrst exclude genuine illness. There may
      be no alternative to admission and observation to make the diagnosis, even
      though this achieves the patient’s aim. If suspicions are aroused, discreetly
      check past history. Once discovered, most patients self-discharge, often
      noisily, but rarely violently.
      Avoid a ‘showdown’ Simply state that deception is at an end, that no
      retribution is planned and offer to help the patient with their problem.
      Do not use placebos to uncover fabricated illness—they can work equally
      well on genuine symptoms!
      Once discovered, record events carefully, particularly the medical history
      given, background details, appearance, scars. Circulate details to other EDs.
      Factitious disorder in health care workers
      The Clothier report (Department of Health, 1994) advised that
      patients with severe personality disorder (by inference, factitious disorder)
      should be prevented from working in health-related disciplines. Detection
      of factitious disorder in health care workers has serious implications. If
      suspected, discuss immediately with the ED consultant.
                                 MEDICALLY UNEXPLAINED SYMPTOMS                   621

Medically unexplained symptoms
Background
A signiﬁcant proportion of patients who attend the ED have symptoms
for which no cause is found. Some of these patients manage to build up a
signiﬁcant volume (or volumes!) of medical records.
Terminology
There is a potentially confusing range of terms in use.
Somatization
Physical symptoms with presumed psychological origin.
Somatoform pain disorder
Persistent, severe unexplained pain, which is attributed to psychological
disorders.
Conversion (dissociative) disorders
Loss or disturbance of normal motor or sensory function, which is attrib-
uted to a psychological origin (thoughts/memories to the conscious mind
are ‘converted’ into physical symptoms (eg amnesia).
Factitious symptoms
Symptoms which are intentionally produced, with the aim of receiving a
medical diagnosis—when there is secondary gain (eg legal compensation,
obtaining opioid drugs), it is known as malingering.
Medically unexplained symptoms
This is an umbrella term, which makes no assumptions about the cause of
the symptoms.
Differential diagnosis
Patients who present acutely with medically unexplained symptoms
may be suffering from a range of problems, including: anxiety, depres-
sion, psychosis, ‘functional somatic illness’, conversion disorders, factitious
disorders, malingering, and uncommon medical syndromes that have not
yet been diagnosed.
Approach to patients with medically unexplained symptoms
The Royal College of Psychiatrists (www.rcpsych.ac.uk) has published
some useful recommendations. Consider the following:
• Try to obtain past medical and psychiatric records/summaries
  (computerized records may assist in this process) and/or speak to
  the GP.
• If the patient’s medical complaints are known to be unexplained (or
  part of a psychiatric illness), then further investigations may be inappro-
  priate.
• Investigate judiciously—do not underestimate the ability to cause iatro-
  genic harm.
622    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Alcohol abuse
      Alcohol-related problems account for up to 15% of the ED workload in
      the UK. Alcoholics have i rates of heart disease, malignancy, and stroke,
      but often succumb to injuries. Excessive alcohol consumption is a feature
      of 30% of road trafﬁc fatalities, 25% of fatal work injuries, 30% of drown-
      ings and 50% of burn deaths. Alcohol is involved in 830% of suicides, 860%
      of homicides and most assaults. Suspicion is the key to detecting alcohol
      problems.
      Units
      The number of ‘units’ (10mL of pure alcohol) is included on packaging.
      A bottle of wine contains 810U and a bottle of spirits 830U. Current
      advice is a ‘safe’ limit of 21U/week (males) and 14U/week (females).
      Alcohol absorption, metabolism, and elimination
      Alcohol is absorbed from the small intestine and to a lesser extent, the
      stomach. The rate of absorption depends on the nature of the drink and
      any associated food consumed. Alcohol is absorbed more slowly from
      dilute drinks (eg wine) compared with more concentrated fortiﬁed sherry
      or port. Alcohol is water soluble, so distributes throughout the body. It is
      mostly metabolized in the liver by an enzymatic process involving alcohol
      dehydrogenase, which converts it to acetaldehyde and then acetic acid. A
      relatively small amount of alcohol is excreted unchanged in the urine (and
      to a lesser extent, in breath and sweat).
      Clearance of alcohol The rate of clearance of alcohol from the blood
      varies enormously between individuals, with typical quoted values of
      10–20mg/dL/hr in most adults, although higher values occur in some
      chronic alcoholics.
      Assessing alcohol problems
      A history of alcohol consumption is notoriously unreliable when taken
      from heavy drinkers and chronic alcoholics, who may signiﬁcantly under-
      report the extent of their drinking and its effect upon their lives. The actual
      amount of alcohol consumed is less important than the consequences of
      drinking to the patient. Cover the following areas:
      Biological GI upset/bleeding, withdrawal ﬁts, blackouts, peripheral
      neuropathy.
      Psychological Low mood, hallucinations, delusions, memory problems.
      Social Marital, work, driving, debt, criminality.
      Signiﬁcant features include compulsion to drink and loss of control.
      The CAGE questionnaire
      • Have you ever felt you should Cut down your drinking?
      • Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?
      • Have you ever felt Guilty about your drinking?
      • Have you ever had a drink ﬁrst-thing in the morning to steady your
        nerves or to get rid of a hangover (Eye-opener)?
      Any single, +ve answer is signiﬁcant and >1 +ve answer is probably
      diagnostic of chronic alcohol dependence.
                                       ACUTE ALCOHOL INTOXICATION                    623

Acute alcohol intoxication
Effects of intoxication
Alcohol depresses the nervous system—initial euphoric effects are due to
suppression of inhibition by the cerebral cortex. Effects vary between indi-
viduals and Table 14.5 is a very rough guide. Behaviour, including propen-
sity to violence, is inﬂuenced by environment and social setting. Although
death may occur at levels >350mg/100mL, the risk of a harmful or fatal
event increases at any level: especially road trafﬁc collisions, work and
home accidents and assaults (including sexual assault). The current UK
blood alcohol legal limit for driving is 80mg/mL.
 Table 14.5 Effects of various concentrations of alcohol
 Blood alcohol concentration         Effects
 (mg/100mL = mg/dL)
 30–50                               Measurable impairment of motor skills
 50–100                              Reduced inhibitions, ‘excitant effect’
 100–150                             Loss of co-ordination and control
 150–200                             ‘Drunkenness’, nausea, ataxia
 200–350                             Vomiting, stupor, possible coma
 350+                                Respiratory paralysis, possible death

Alcohol intoxication is characterized by slurred speech, incoordination,
unsteady gait, nystagmus, lethargy, and facial ﬂushing. The differential diagnosis
is extensive: head injury, hypoglycaemia, post-ictal confusional states, hepatic
encephalopathy, meningitis, encephalitis, or intoxication with other drugs. In
most patients these conditions can be excluded by examination and simple
investigations (although some not infrequently coexist with acute alcohol
intoxication—especially head injury and hypoglycaemia).
Management
Aim to discharge conscious, ambulant patients who exhibit uncomplicated
acute alcohol intoxication if accompanied by a responsible adult.
Violent patients who appear intoxicated require examination prior to
escort from the ED by police. As a minimum, perform a brief neurological
examination, simple observations and BMG.
Comatose patients are a medical emergency. Protect the airway
and anticipate vomiting (recovery position may be useful). Exclude
hypoglycaemia and other metabolic causes of coma. Exclude head or
neck injury, and adopt a low threshold for X-ray and/or CT scanning.
Close observation is mandatory.
Alcohol-induced hypoglycaemia particularly affects chronic alcoholics
and children. It also occurs in binge drinkers who present with alcoholic
ketoacidosis. Hypoglycaemia can occur during intoxication and up to 24hr
after. In children, ﬁts may result.
Coagulation disorders often occur in chronic alcoholics with liver damage.
Consider this in patients presenting with GI haemorrhage or head injury.
624    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Alcohol withdrawal
      ‘Simple’ alcohol withdrawal
      Uncomplicated alcohol withdrawal is common, usually starting within 12hr
      of stopping (or reducing) alcohol intake. Withdrawal symptoms often
      commence before alcohol is completely cleared from the blood. Features
      include anxiety, restlessness, tremor, insomnia, sweating, tachycardia,
      and ataxia. Simple withdrawal can be managed on an outpatient or day
      patient basis. It may be appropriate to commence treatment in the ED for
      uncomplicated withdrawal (eg diazepam 5–10mg PO or chlordiazepoxide
      10–30mg), but continuing treatment should not be prescribed by ED staff.
      Inpatient detoxiﬁcation is indicated for those with a history of withdrawal
      seizures, delirium tremens or with withdrawal symptoms who are being
      admitted for other problems. The revised Clinical Institute Withdrawal
      Assessment for Alcohol (CIWA-Ar) Score assesses 10 clinical signs of
      withdrawal and may help to guide treatment (www.agingincanada.ca/
      CIWA.HTM). Note: alcoholics admitted with ‘simple’ withdrawal may be
      thiamine deﬁcient, and need parenteral and/or oral thiamine.
      Delirium tremens
      Occurs in a small minority of alcoholics who undergo withdrawal and
      carries a signiﬁcant mortality. It typically starts >48hr after stopping
      drinking. As well as ‘simple’ withdrawal, there may be signiﬁcant auto-
      nomic hyperactivity, with tachycardia, hyper-reﬂexia, hypertension, fever,
      visual or tactile hallucinations, sinister delusions, disorientation, and confu-
      sion. Deaths occur from arrhythmias (secondary to acidosis, electrolyte
      disturbance, or alcohol-related cardiomyopathy), infection, ﬁts or cardio-
      vascular collapse. Monitor closely, check BMG, give IV diazepam as appro-
      priate (especially for ﬁts) and refer to the medical team/HDU.
      Alcohol withdrawal ﬁts
      These typically comprise self-limiting grand mal seizures which occur
      hours or days after the last alcoholic drink. Check BMG and treat ﬁts in
      a standard fashion (b Seizures and status epilepticus, p.149). Examine
      carefully for possible head injury.
      Alcoholic ketoacidosis
      This can occur when an alcoholic stops drinking, vomits repeatedly and
      does not eat. Ketoacidosis develops from fatty acid breakdown, compli-
      cated by dehydration from vomiting. The patient usually presents 1–2 days
      after the last binge with vomiting, signs of chronic alcohol abuse and a
      high anion gap metabolic acidosis. Arterial blood gas (ABG) may reveal
      d pCO2, d HCO3–, normal pO2. pH is variable because metabolic acidosis
      may be altered by metabolic alkalosis from vomiting and possibly respi-
      ratory alkalosis. Plasma ethanol is low or absent. Differential diagnosis
      includes salicylate, methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning (b p.203).
      Give IV 0.9% saline with 5% glucose and thiamine supplementation,
      whilst monitoring U&E, glucose. Refer to the medical team and consider
      HDU/ICU.
                                                  HELP FOR ALCOHOLICS              625

Alcohol-related brain injury
Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome develops in problem drinkers who are
thiamine deﬁcient. Autopsy analysis suggests that the syndrome may occur
in as many as 12.5% of chronic alcohol misusers. A presumptive diagnosis
of the Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome may be made in patients with a
history of alcohol misuse and one or more of the following unexplained
symptoms: ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus, confusion, memory distur-
bance, reduced conscious level, hypotension, and/or hypothermia.
Wernicke’s encephalopathy
This is characterized by degenerative changes surrounding the third
ventricle and aqueduct, particularly the mammillary bodies. It presents
with an acute confusional state, nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and
polyneuropathy. Ataxia typically affects the trunk and lower extremities.
Clinical abnormalities may develop acutely or evolve over several days.
Initial treatment involves parenteral thiamine (eg Pabrinex® 10mL as an IV
infusion in 100mL 0.9% saline over 30min). Note that this may occasionally
cause anaphylaxis, so ensure that resuscitation facilities are available.
Subsequent treatment involves oral thiamine.
Korsakoff’s psychosis
This is an amnesic state with profound retrograde and anterograde
amnesia, but relative preservation of other intellectual abilities. It typically
develops after Wernicke’s encephalopathy, but some patients develop
a combined syndrome from the outset with memory loss, eye signs and
unsteadiness but without confusion.
Treat with parenteral thiamine and admission as for Wernicke’s
encephalopathy.

Help for alcoholics
The relatively regular contact between those with alcohol problems and
EDs may be viewed as an opportunity to offer intervention. There is good
evidence to suggest that brief interventions may reduce alcohol consump-
tion and the risk of physical harm. Consider the 1min Paddington Alcohol
Test to help patients who present with alcohol-related problems (http://
alcalc.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/44/3/284).
The following organizations may help:
Alcoholics Anonymous (www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk), plus local
networks and telephone numbers.
Al-Anon for relatives telephone number 020 7403 0888 (and websites
www.al-anonuk.org.uk and www.al-anon.alateen.org).
626    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Drug and substance abuse
      Drug users present to the ED at times of crisis (eg acute intoxication,
      overdose, withdrawal or other medical complications of drug use). Do
      not assume all drug users present to the ED simply to obtain drugs. Find
      out about local addiction services and how referrals are made. Direct
      those seeking help with a drug problem to the appropriate services. Know
      local preferred drugs of abuse and the preferred methods of taking them.
      Find out what terminology is used locally for each substance.
      Do not supply drugs of dependence to addicts. Prescriptions are carefully
      controlled by addiction services and pharmacists. Elaborate tales of lost
      or stolen drugs/prescriptions are invariably false.
      Manage painful conditions in drug addicts as for other patients. Do
      not withhold analgesia if in obvious pain. For minor complaints, simple
      analgesia is as effective as in non-drug users. Do not dismiss symptoms
      simply because the patient is a drug user. Even drug abusers get acute
      appendicitis and other common acute illnesses.
      Intoxication
      As with alcohol, mild cases require little intervention. Observation by a
      responsible adult or brieﬂy in a ward usually sufﬁces. Discharge patients
      when ambulant and fully orientated, having excluded serious problems.
      Glue and solvents Users may smell of substances or have them on their
      clothes or skin. There may be a perioral rash. Intoxication produces
      euphoria, agitation or drowsiness, slurred speech, and unsteady gait.
      Benzodiazepines and CNS depressants Mild intoxication is similar to that
      with alcohol. i intoxication produces nystagmus, diplopia, strabismus,
      hypotonia, clumsiness, and moderately dilated pupils.
      Amphetamines, ecstasy, cocaine and mephedrone Produce hyperstim-
      ulation, restlessness, pyrexia and sympathomimetic effects. Cocaine
      effects occur more rapidly. Severe cases exhibit paranoia, violent
      behaviour or seizures. Cocaine may also cause chest pain, arrhythmias or
      even MI. Ecstasy can cause an idiosyncratic reaction similar to malignant
      hyperthermia (see b Illicit drugs, p.214).
      Overdose
      Protect the airway, provide oxygen (O2) as required and exclude hypogly-
      caemia or serious injury in all cases.
      Opioid overdose is often inadvertent, either from use of unusually pure
      drugs or after a period of abstinence (tolerance is d). Characteristic signs
      are coma with pinpoint pupils and respiratory depression (see b p.188).
      Pulmonary oedema, hypothermia and rhabdomyolysis can occur. Hypoxia
      may cause dilated pupils. If opioid overdose is suspected, give naloxone
      0.4–0.8mg IV, repeated according to response. See b Antidotes to poisons
      (b p.186) for further detail regarding treatment. Remember to ensure that
      the patient is observed for at least 6h after the last dose of naloxone.
      Intentional overdose requires assessment of suicide risk (b p.614) and
      mental capacity in case the patient threatens to leave against advice.
                                         DRUG AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE                627

Skin complications
SC drug injection (‘skin popping’) can cause cellulitis, abscesses, extensive
skin necrosis, necrotizing fasciitis, tetanus, botulism and anthrax. Refer for
formal exploration, drainage and follow-up by the surgical team for all
but the most minor infections. Apparently ‘simple’ abscesses may extend
deeply into muscle or form part of a false aneurysm! Needle fragments
rarely require removal unless they embolize (eg to the lungs).
Anthrax in drug users
After an outbreak of anthrax in heroin users in Scotland in 2010, Health
Protection Scotland (www.hps.scot.nhs.uk) advised doctors to suspect
anthrax in a drug user presenting with any of the following:
• Severe soft tissue infection and/or signs of severe sepsis/meningitis.
• Clinical features of inhalational anthrax (b p.233).
• Respiratory symptoms + features of meningitis or intracranial bleeding.
• GI symptoms (eg pain, bleeding, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, ascites).
Approach
Get expert help early to advise on management (ICU, surgeons, micro-
biology, Public Health, hospital infection team). Start IV antibiotics
according to advice (eg combination of ciproﬂoxacin, clindamycin + peni-
cillin or if there is soft tissue infection: ciproﬂoxacin, clindamycin, peni-
cillin, ﬂucloxacillin + metronidazole). Experts will advise on whether to
use anthrax immune globulin intravenous (human) antitoxin.
Vascular complications
IV injection (‘mainlining’) of drugs causes phlebitis, DVT, and bacterial
endocarditis. Chronic injectors may resort to neck or groin vessels (the
femoral artery being commonly damaged). Arterial injection can cause
false aneurysms, ﬁstulae, or peripheral emboli. Occasionally, IV drug users
present with massive and devastating blood loss from an injection site
(particularly the groin): apply ﬁrm pressure, resuscitate with IV ﬂuids ±
blood and call for the surgical team.
Inadvertent arterial injection of poorly soluble preparations causes severe
limb pain, skin pallor and mottling with paraesthesiae in the presence of
palpable (often bounding) peripheral pulses. Diffuse soft tissue damage
may result in compartment syndromes, rhabdomyolysis, renal failure, and
irreversible limb damage necessitating amputation.
Orthopaedic complications
Injecting drug users who present with acutely painful joints (especially hip
joints) may have septic arthritis. Clinical and radiological evidence may be
minimal, so adopt a high index of suspicion. Provide analgesia, take blood
cultures, and FBC, and admit for joint aspiration and IV antibiotics.
Drug withdrawal states
Sometimes drug users present to hospital with overt evidence of drug
(±alcohol) withdrawal. It can be difﬁcult to judge whether the problem
is due to drug intoxication, drug-related (eg stimulant induced psychosis,
‘panic reaction’), drug withdrawal, or to coexistent disease. Observe
and monitor closely—treat symptomatically (eg with small doses of oral
benzodiazepines as necessary) and refer to the medical team.
628    CHAPTER 14 Psychiatry

      Compulsory hospitalization
      Compulsory detention of patients in the UK requires the patient to be both:
      • Suffering from a mental disorder (mental illness or handicap).
      • Requiring emergency hospital admission to protect the health or safety
        of the patient or for the protection of others.
      Emergency detention under mental health legislation does not allow
      treatment for psychiatric illness. Emergency treatment of psychiatric or
      physical illness is carried out under common law. In this situation, there
      must be an immediate threat to life or serious danger to the patient or
      others, if treatment is not given. For this reason, mental health legislation
      cannot be used to impose emergency treatment without patient consent.
      Note that ED patients are not legally inpatients until they go to a ward.
      Detention of psychiatric emergencies in the ED
      England and Wales
      Section 2 is used most commonly in the ED. It requires recommendations
      from 2 doctors to be accepted by an approved social worker and allows
      detention for up to 28 days for assessment and treatment.
      Scotland
      The Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 came into
      effect in 2005—see www.nes-mha.scot.nhs.uk/. Part 5 of the Act enables
      a fully registered medical practitioner to grant an emergency detention
      certiﬁcate that authorizes managers of a hospital to detain someone for
      72hr. Before granting an emergency detention certiﬁcate, the medical
      practitioner also needs to consult and gain the consent of a mental health
      ofﬁcer, unless impracticable. The patient is then examined by an approved
      medical practitioner (psychiatrist), who if not satisﬁed that the relevant
      criteria are met, cancels the certiﬁcate.
      Northern Ireland
      Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order 1986, Part II.
      Article 4—Admission for assessment of mental disorder.
      • Requires 2 or 3 doctors including the responsible medical ofﬁcer (RMO)
        —in charge of patient’s treatment.
      • Application by nearest relative or an approved social worker.
      • Lasts 7 days, renewable up to 14 days.
      • Lasts until discharge by RMO board or nearest relative or until detained
        under article 12.
      Section 136 (England)
      This allows a police ofﬁcer to detain someone in a public place when he/
      she appears to be mentally disordered and is causing a disturbance. The
      police ofﬁcer’s responsibility is to take the detained person to a ‘place
      of safety’ (usually a police station or psychiatric ward) where he/she is
      assessed by a psychiatrist and approved social worker.
      The Mental Health Act (Scotland) 2003 provides police ofﬁcers in Scotland
      with similar powers: a police constable may remove a person to a place of
      safety from a public place, if a mental disorder is suspected and it is also
      suspected that the person needs immediate care and treatment.
                                                 MENTAL CAPACITY ACT             629

Mental Capacity Act
The Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA) offers a comprehensive framework
for decision-making on behalf of adults aged >16 years lacking capacity to
make decisions on their own behalf. It only applies in England and Wales.
Deﬁning capacity
A person lacks capacity if, when a decision needs to be made, they are
unable to make or communicate the decision because of an ‘impairment
or disturbance of the mind or brain’. There is a 2-stage test of capacity:
• Is there an impairment of, or disturbance in the functioning of, the
  person’s mind or brain? If so,
• Is the impairment or disturbance sufﬁcient that the person lacks the
  capacity to make that particular decision?
Five statutory principles
• Capacity must be assumed unless it is established to be lacking.
• A person is not being treated as unable to make a decision unless all
  practicable steps to help him do so have been taken without success.
• A person should not be treated as unable to make a decision merely
  because he makes an unwise decision.
• A decision made, or action performed, for or on behalf of a person who
  lacks capacity must be taken in his/her best interests.
• Before a decision is made or an action performed, consideration must
  be given to whether the purpose for which it is needed can be as effec-
  tively achieved in a way that is less restrictive of the person’s rights and
  freedom of action.
Assessment of capacity
A person lacks capacity if he/she fails:
• To understand the information relevant to the decision.
• To retain the information relevant to the decision.
• To use or weigh the information.
• To communicate the decision (by any means).
Admission and treatment
Patients can be admitted and treated under the Mental Capacity Act 2005
only if 6 qualifying safeguards are met:
• The person is at least 18 years old.
• The person has a mental disorder.
• The person lacks capacity to decide whether to be in hospital or care
  home for the proposed treatment or care.
• The proposed deprivation of liberty is in the person’s best interests and
  it is necessary and proportionate response to the risk of harm.
• The person is not subject, or potentially subject, to speciﬁed provisions
  of the Mental Health Act in a way that makes them ineligible.
• There is no advance decision, or decision of an attorney or deputy
  which makes the proposed deprivation of liberty impossible.
In other circumstances, consider using the Mental Health Act 1983 to
admit mentally disordered patient who lack capacity to consent.
630    Chapter 00
               15

      Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric problems also covered elsewhere in this book:
      b Consent                                             28
      b Poisoning                                          179
      b Incubation periods of infectious diseases          220
      b Childhood infectious diseases                      222
      b Meningitis                                         224
      b Gastroenteritis/food poisoning                     226
      b Infestations                                       230
      b Analgesia in speciﬁc situations                    280
      b Nasal diamorphine                                  281
      b Local anaesthesia in children                      287
      b Sedation                                           309
      b Instructions after minor head injury               367
      b Tetanus prophylaxis                                410
      b Earache                                            550
      b Sore throat                                        554

      The paediatric environment                               632
      Primary assessment and resuscitation of the sick child   634
      Standard immunization schedule                           636
      Venous access and venepuncture                           638
      Intra-osseous infusion                                   640
      Resuscitation of the newborn                             642
      Cardiopulmonary resuscitation of the newborn             644
      Paediatric basic life support                            646
      Choking from a foreign body                              648
      Anaphylaxis in children                                  650
      Paediatric advanced life support                         652
      Paediatric advanced life support notes                   654
      Children with abnormal heart rates or rhythms            656
      Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)                      658
      Problems of neonates and infants                         660
      Skin problems in infants                                 662
      The febrile child                                        663
      Purpuric rashes                                          664
 Chapter 15                                        631

Paediatric emergencies

Meningococcal disease                        666
How to perform a lumbar puncture             670
Skin lesions in multisystem disease          672
Paediatric ENT problems                      674
Stridor: upper respiratory infections        676
Severe acute asthma in children              678
Acute bronchiolitis                          682
Whooping coughND                             684
TBND and cystic ﬁbrosis                      685
Pneumonia                                    686
Fits, febrile convulsions, and funny turns   688
Status epilepticus                           690
Diabetic ketoacidosis                        691
Urinary tract infection (UTI)                692
Renal failure                                694
Haematuria                                   695
Poisoning in children                        696
Prevention of paediatric poisoning           697
Abdominal pain in children                   698
Inguinal and scrotal swellings               700
Foreskin problems and zip entrapment         702
The limping child                            704
The painful hip                              706
Osteochondritis                              708
Major paediatric trauma                      710
Injury prevention                            711
Resuscitation of the injured child           712
Considerations in paediatric trauma          714
Head injuries in children                    716
Paediatric fractures and dislocations        718
Approach to limb injuries in children        720
Paediatric upper limb injuries               722
Paediatric lower limb injuries               726
Child abuse                                  728
Presentation of child abuse                  730
Management of child abuse                    734
632    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      The paediatric environment
      Dealing with children
      Children are not little adults. They differ from adults anatomically, physi-
      ologically, emotionally, and in the spectrum of pathological conditions
      to which they are susceptible. It is natural for those hospital staff who
      have not previously dealt with children to be slightly apprehensive about
      treating them, particularly when they are distressed or seriously unwell.
      Be guided by more experienced staff, who are often adept at dealing
      with children as patients (and very often as parents as well). Such staff
      are particularly good at recognizing children who are seriously unwell—
      listen carefully to what they have to say. There is no substitute for expe-
      rience, but practical courses aimed at managing emergencies in children
      (eg Advanced Paediatric Life Support (APLS)) are highly recommended.
      These courses deservedly devote much time to the recognition of seriously
      ill or injured children, according to whether or not they are physiologically
      deranged. Consider each child according to expected ‘normal’ physiological
      values (see Table 15.1).
      Children do not always respond in the same way to illness as adults. They
      are particularly likely to be frightened of doctors, nurses, and hospitals.
      Do not waste the opportunity to make important observations (respi-
      ratory rate, pattern, and effort, behaviour, conscious level, colour, and
      parental interaction). Spend time talking to children to reassure them
      and win their conﬁdence before starting any examination or performing
      any procedure (unless, of course, they require emergency resuscitation).
      Lowering yourself to their physical level will make you less intimidating.
      Involve the parents from the start (see below). Where appropriate, allow
      children to relax and play with toys. Play therapists can be particularly
      helpful providing distraction during procedures.
      Dealing with parents
      Parents are patients too. They are likely to be understandably upset and
      worried. Take time to explain to the parents exactly what is happening
      to their children at all stages. Obtain appropriate consent, but do not
      delay life-saving measures. For the sake of both parents and children, try
      to allow parents to remain with their children as much as possible. This is
      especially important during resuscitation where an experienced member
      of the nursing staff should be allocated to look after and explain to parents
      what is happening. If the presence of the parents is impeding the progress
      of the resuscitation, gently ask them to leave.
      Analgesia
      Differences between adults and children do not diminish the need to
      provide adequate analgesia for children. Reassurance is often an important
      component, but be honest and do not be tempted to tell to a child that a
      painful procedure (eg emergency insertion of an intravenous (IV) cannula)
      will not produce any pain or discomfort—this will simply cause the child
      to lose conﬁdence.
                                                 THE PAEDIATRIC ENVIRONMENT                   633

Weight estimation
All children should be weighed when they require treatment in the ED.
This is as important as the vital signs in children. In an emergency, use a
Broselow tape or one of the formulae for estimating children’s weight.
The following formula estimates a child’s weight based upon age (between
1 and 10 years):
                  weight in kg = (age in years + 4) × 2
so a 6-year old child will weigh:
                                     (6+4) × 2 = 20kg
This formula often underestimates the weight of many children in the
UK or other developed countries but it may overestimate the weight of
children from other regions. A formula using mid-arm circumference
(MAC) has been developed in Asia1 and is:
            weight in kg = (mid-arm circumference in cm – 10) × 3
so a child with a 15cm MAC will weigh: (15 – 10) × 3 = 15kg.
Drug doses
Do not estimate ‘rough doses’ of drugs for children based on knowledge
of adult doses. Instead, use the weight and age of a child, together with a
reference source (eg BNF for Children http://bnfc.org/bnfc) to determine
the appropriate dose.
Preparation for resuscitation
Find out where the paediatric resuscitation equipment is kept and how it
works. Learn the paediatric resuscitation guidelines and practice basic life
support (BLS) and other procedures on manikins. Ask your local resuscitation
ofﬁcer for help with training. Knowledge of normal (expected) physiology at
various ages will help you to evaluate sick children in the ED.

 Table 15.1 Normal (expected) physiological values at different ages*
 Age (years)            Respiratory rate               Heart rate          Systolic BP
 <1                     30–40                          110–160             70–90
 1–2                    25–35                          100–150             80–95
 2–5                    25–30                          95–140              80–100
 5–12                   20–25                          80120               90–110
 >12                    15–20                          60–100              100–120
 Expected systolic BP = 80 + (age in years × 2) mmHg.
 *Adapted from APLS.

1 Cattermole GN et al. Mid-arm circumference can be used to estimate children's weights.
  Resuscitation. 2010. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2010.05.015.
  PMID: 20619953.
634    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Primary assessment and resuscitation
      of the sick child
      Caring for a sick child is a daunting task. Get experienced help early; call
      for senior ED, paediatric, and ICU/PICU help if you are alerted that a sick
      or injured child is being brought to the ED.
      Perform a primary assessment of Airway, Breathing, Circulation, and
      Disability to identify and treat life-threatening problems as they are found
      in order to maintain vital functions before disease speciﬁc therapies
      are started. Early recognition and treatment is essential to avoid cardio-
      respiratory arrest with its poor outcome.
      Airway
      Assess patency by looking, feeling, and listening.
      Resuscitate: if there is no air movement, perform chin lift or jaw thrust.
      If there is still no evidence of air movement, give rescue breaths using an
      appropriately-sized bag-valve-mask device. If the child is breathing, listen
      for stridor, and look for recession.
      Breathing
      Assess the effort of breathing by measuring the respiratory rate, looking
      for intercostal recession and accessory muscle use, and listen for gasping,
      stridor, wheeze, and grunting.
      Assess the efﬁcacy of breathing by looking for chest expansion, auscultation
      of the chest, and measuring SpO2.
      Assess the effects of respiratory failure by assessing mental status and
      by measuring the heart rate (increases with hypoxia, but bradycardia is
      a pre-terminal sign) and examining skin colour (hypoxia causes pallor,
      cyanosis is a late sign). Reduced breathing effort may indicate exhaustion
      (a pre-terminal sign), cerebral depression, or neuromuscular disease.
      Resuscitate: give high ﬂow O2 to any child with respiratory difﬁculty or
      hypoxia. If respiration is inadequate, support with basic airway care and
      bag valve mask ventilation and get senior ED/ICU/PICU help to provide a
      deﬁnitive airway (tracheal intubation and IPPV).
      Circulation
      Assess heart rate (bradycardia is a late sign of cardiovascular failure) pulse
      volume, capillary reﬁll, BP (hypotension is a pre-terminal sign), skin tem-
      perature. Look for the effects of circulatory failure: tachypnoea, mottled
      cold skin, poor urine output, agitation, and drowsiness.
      Resuscitate: give high ﬂow oxygen (O2) to all shocked patients. Gain IV/IO
      access, take blood samples and give 20mL/kg of crystalloid. Re-assess and
      repeat if necessary.
  PRIMARY ASSESSMENT AND RESUSCITATION OF THE SICK CHILD                       635

Disability
Any problem with ‘ABC’ can affect ‘D’.
Assess conscious level. Initially, categorize according to AVPU scale:
A—Alert
V—responds to Voice
P—responds to Pain
U—Unresponsive
Check pupil size, reaction and equality.
Assess GCS (or children’s equivalent—see b Head injuries in children,
p.716) and posture (ﬂoppy, decerebrate, decorticate, etc.). Check BMG.
Resuscitate: a child who does not respond to voice has an urgent need
to secure the airway. Treat hypoglycaemia and ﬁts, and get senior help
urgently.
After initial evaluation and intervention, a more detailed approach to iden-
tify speciﬁc problems should follow. Re-assess ABCD frequently to assess
progress and detect deterioration. Undertake a secondary assessment by
obtaining a full history (from parents, paramedics, teachers and witnesses)
and undertaking a detailed physical examination.
636    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Standard immunization schedule
      The UK Department of Health actively encourages immunization for
      children according to the standard schedule shown below.1 The recom-
      mended timing of the early immunizations is a compromise between
      trying to protect children whilst they are at most risk and delaying it until
      immunization is likely to be most effective. Children who have completed
      a course of immunization against a particular disease are obviously less
      likely to present with that disease. Unfortunately, a signiﬁcant proportion
      of children are still not receiving standard vaccines (Table 15.2). Carefully
      enquire exactly which immunizations the child has received (information
      is often available from the child’s GP or health visitor). Failure to follow
      the recommended schedule may result in the child presenting with an
      otherwise unusual disease.

       Table 15.2 Standard childhood vaccines
       Age             Vaccine
       2 months        Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Hib, pneumococcal
       3 months        Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Hib, meningitis C
       4 months        Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Hib, pneumococcal, meningitis C
       12 months       Hib, meningitis C
       13 months       Measles, mumps, rubella, (MMR), pneumococcal
       3–5 years       Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, MMR
       13–18 years Tetanus, diphtheria, polio
       *May also be given in infancy, if appropriate.

      The Hib vaccine
      Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, a small Gram –ve bacillus, has been responsible
      for the deaths of many young children. Type b has been implicated most
      frequently in serious paediatric disease, causing meningitis, pneumonia,
      cellulitis, and most, particularly, acute epiglottitis. The Haemophilus B
      (‘Hib’) vaccine has dramatically reduced the incidence of epiglottitis.
      Pneumococcal vaccine
      This was introduced as routine in the UK in 2006.

      1 Department of Health. Immunization against infectious disease - 'The Green Book'. HMSO,
        London, 2007. Available at: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/
        PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_079917. See also: BNFC.
                                        STANDARD IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE                       637

Reactions to immunizations
Vaccination is frequently wrongly blamed for symptoms caused by
incidental viral illness. However, mild reactions, such as swelling and ery-
thema at the injection site, are relatively common following administration
of a variety of immunizations. These respond to symptomatic treatment
and an expectant approach. Severe anaphylactic reactions, involving
airway obstruction or circulatory collapse are uncommon, but require
prompt and aggressive treatment (b Anaphylaxis, p.42).
Immunization in other countries
If a child who normally lives outside the UK attends the ED, enquire
carefully about their vaccination history. Likewise, if you are working
outside the UK, make sure you know the local immunization schedule as this
can have a signiﬁcant impact on the type of communicable disease seen,
particularly in children.
Immunization in the ED
If a child attending the ED has not been immunized against diphtheria,
tetanus, and pertussis and needs tetanus immunization, give the ‘triple
vaccine’ (DPT) to avoid repeated injections. Inform the GP about any
immunizations given.

 Table 15.3 Paediatric milestones1 (after allowance for preterm delivery)
 2 months            Eyes follow movement. Smiles and makes noises when talked to
 3 months            Holds object placed in hand
 3–4 months          Turns head to sound
 6 months            Sits on ﬂoor with hands forwards for support
                     Transfers object from one hand to the other
 9–10 months         Crawls
 12 months           Walks with one hand held; says 2 or 3 words with meaning
 13 months           Walks unaided
 18 months           Makes tower of 2 or 3 bricks
 21–24 months Joins 2 or 3 words together to make sentence
 2 years             Can build a tower of 6 or 7 bricks
 2½ years            Knows full name and gender; can stand on tiptoes

1 See: Illingworth RS. The Normal Child. 10th edn. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh, 1991.
638    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Venous access and venepuncture
      Venepuncture
      Needles frighten children. Topical anaesthetic cream (eg tetracaine—
      b p.288) is useful whenever the need for blood sampling is not urgent. 4%
      tetracaine (Ametop®, amethocaine) anaesthetizes the skin and d pain, but
      should be applied for 30min before venepuncture and for 45min before can-
      nulation. Identify prominent veins at 2 separate sites, apply cream and cover
      with an adhesive ﬁlm dressing, then let the child play.
      As in adults, if an IV cannula is inserted, it should be possible to obtain
      samples of blood via this: even if aspiration fails, blood will often drip out.
      The amount of blood sampled depends upon the size of the child and
      laboratory requirements, remembering that total blood volume is only
      80mL/kg. Check requirements and obtain the appropriate bottles before
      attempting venepuncture.
      Neonates FBC and U&E can be performed on capillary samples obtained
      from heel pricks. Ask an assistant to hold the foot and ankle ﬁrmly to
      encourage venous engorgement, then smear white soft parafﬁn on the
      heel and prick it with a lancet. Collect drops of blood into prepared
      capillary sample tubes.
      Toddlers and infants Aspirate via a 23G butterﬂy needle in the hand or
      forearm. This allows the needle to stay in the vein, despite the child
      moving. Samples of 1mL are usually required.
      Older children Use a 21G butterﬂy needle.
      IV cannulae
      The route chosen to obtain venous access will depend upon the available
      veins and urgency of the problem. First attempt to insert an IV cannula
      percutaneously into an upper limb vein. Once inserted, ﬂush the cannula,
      then secure it with adhesive tape, a splint, and bandage. In general, the fol-
      lowing sizes of cannulae are appropriate:
      • 24G (orange/yellow): neonates and infants.
      • 22G (blue): toddlers and small children.
      • 20G (pink) or 18G (green): older children.
      Smaller cannulae are designed so the needle does not protrude much
      beyond the end of the cannula. This means that once a ‘ﬂashback’ is
      obtained, the tip of the cannula may already be within the vein: advancing
      the needle further may puncture the other side of the vein and exit it. If
      attempts to insert a cannula into the hand or arm fail, it may be possible
      to use veins in the feet, ankle, or in the scalp (useful in neonates, but ﬁrst
      ensure that the intended target is not the superﬁcial temporal artery). In
      an emergency, allow a maximum of 90sec and if still unsuccessful then gain
      intra-osseous access (b p.640), which is quick, easy, and reliable. Other
      venous access routes (eg central, femoral) require specialist training, are
      time-consuming and are associated with signiﬁcant complications (see
      opposite). Give ﬂuids by infusion pump or paediatric infusion set to avoid
      over-transfusion.
                               VENOUS ACCESS AND VENEPUNCTURE                   639

Other routes of venous access
Femoral lines The femoral vein lies medial to the artery in the groin.
It allows rapid venous access to be obtained and is particularly useful in
cardiac arrest where physical constraints (eg several resuscitating staff)
restrict access to the neck. Complications include sepsis (use strict aseptic
technique), i risk of thrombosis and damage to other structures including
the hip joint.
External jugular vein cannulation is an option in children in whom spinal
injury is not a concern. Place the child 15–30° head down and turn
the neck to one side. The vein runs superﬁcially and caudally over the
sternocleidomastoid at the junction of its middle and lower third. Ask an
assistant to compress the vein distally to distend and immobilize it.
Central venous access The techniques (and complications) are similar to
those in adults (b p.56), except that smaller equipment is needed. The
safe insertion of central lines in children requires considerable experience
and training, and often requires ultrasound guidance, which is sometimes
unavailable in a resuscitation situation. Other routes are usually more
appropriate during resuscitation.
‘Cut downs’ (eg long saphenous vein at the ankle) may be performed during
resuscitation, but can be time-consuming. In infants, the long saphenous
vein is located half a ﬁnger breadth superior and anterior to the medial
malleolus. For children it is one ﬁnger breadth superior and anterior to
the medial malleolus.
Umbilical venous access can useful in newborn resuscitation (b p.645).
640    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Intra-osseous infusion
      If urgent venous access is required, but not obtained within 90sec by per-
      cutaneous venous puncture, strongly consider using the intra-osseous
      route. Fluid and drugs given into the medullary cavity of long bones
      rapidly reach the central venous circulation. Gaining intra-osseous access
      is reasonably easy and can be performed quickly. It is particularly useful in
      young children, but may be used in all ages, including adults.
      Indications include major burns and trauma, cardiac arrest, and septic
      shock.
      Contraindications include infection or fracture at (or proximal to) the
      insertion site, ipsilateral vascular injuries, multiple unsuccessful attempts,
      osteogenesis imperfecta, osteopetrosis.
      Equipment Intra-osseous needles are usually of 16–18G and have a central
      metal stylet attached to a handle. A battery powered mechanical driver
      (EZ-IO) with paediatric or adult intra-osseous needles is available and
      can be used to insert the needle to a speciﬁc depth, possibly reducing
      complications such as compartment syndrome. It can be used in children
      weighing more than 3kg.
      Site of insertion First choice is the proximal tibia 2.5cm below the tibial
      tuberosity on the ﬂat anteromedial surface (thus avoiding the epiphyseal
      growth plate). If this route is not available, because of local infection
      or trauma, use the distal tibia (proximal to the medial malleolus), distal
      femur (3cm above the lateral lower femoral condyle on the anterolateral
      surface), or the anterolateral proximal humerus at the greater tuberosity
      (Fig. 15.1).
      Manual intra-osseous needle insertion technique
      • Support the limb on a pad or blanket.
      • Sterilize the skin and use an aseptic technique. A small skin incision may
        be needed.
      • Firmly grasp the handle and use a twisting motion to advance the needle
        and stylet through the cortex of the bone. (Note that some intra-
        osseous needles are designed with a thread and so require a rotatory,
        not an oscillatory, action).
      • Aim at 90° to the bone surface, or slightly away from the epiphyseal
        growth plate. Stop when the slight ‘give’ of the medullary cavity is felt.
      • Remove the stylet and try to conﬁrm correct placement by aspirating
        bone marrow (use this to check BMG or cross-match).
      • If aspiration is not possible, the needle may still be correctly positioned:
        attach a primed 3-way tap with extension set and ﬂush the needle and
        3-way tap with 10mL of 0.9% saline, and ensure that there is no swelling
        of the surrounding soft tissues.
      • Although connecting it to IV tubing and a pressurized infusion bag may
        work, it is often much more effective in children to give drugs and ﬂuid
        by boluses using 20mL syringes and the 3-way tap).
      • If necessary, immobilize with a plaster of Paris (POP) backslab applied
        carefully to the posterior leg (eg for transport to a PICU).
                                            INTRA-OSSEOUS INFUSION             641

Mechanical intra-osseous needle insertion technique
• Support the limb on a pad or blanket.
• Use a 15mm needle for patients weighing 3–39kg; a 25mm needle for
  patients more than 39kg; and a 45mm needle for obese adult patients.
• Identify the insertion point and place the needle, loaded into the
  mechanical driver (drill), at the insertion point.
• Insert the needle, perpendicular to the skin, up to the 5mm line.
• Remove the driver and stylet, attach a primed 3-way tap with extension
  set and ﬂush the needle and 3-way tap with 10mL of 0.9% saline.
• Attach the giving set and secure as for manually inserted intra-osseous
  needles.
Use the blood taken from an intra-osseous needle for BMG or cross
matching, but not for FBC (automated blood counters may give spurious
results). If using an intra-osseous needle in responsive patients, inﬁltrate
1% lidocaine into the skin before insertion, and consider administering
1–2mL of 2% lidocaine slowly into the needle before beginning the infusion
to minimize pain (maximum 3mg/kg lidocaine in children).
Complications of intra-osseous access
• Extravasation of ﬂuid and compartment syndrome.
• Infection (cellulitis or osteomyelitis).
• Iatrogenic fracture.
• Fat or bone micro-emboli.
• Fractures and/or epiphyseal growth plate injury.
Intra-osseous needles must be removed within 24hr to minimize the risk
of infection and other complications. Conventional IV access should be
secured as soon as possible after intra-osseous needle insertion.

Fig. 15.1 Tibial intra-osseous access.
642    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Resuscitation of the newborn
      Neonatal resuscitation is usually undertaken by paediatricians, but
      unexpected deliveries require other personnel to initiate resuscitation.
      Fortunately, most newborn babies do not need resuscitation. The
      discomfort of being born into a hostile environment provides the major
      initial stimulus to breathe. Ideally, any baby requiring resuscitation should
      be treated in a warm room with an overhead heater. Call urgently for
      experienced help.
      Approach (see Fig. 15.2)
      Make sure the cord is securely clamped and then dry the baby, remove
      the wet towels and wrap the baby in dry towels. Very preterm babies
      (<28 weeks) should be wrapped in food grade plastic as rapidly as
      possible without drying. Assess colour, tone, breathing by chest movement
      (auscultation at birth is unreliable), and heart rate (best assessed by steth-
      oscope placed over the apex). Repeat assessments every 30sec during
      resuscitation. Traditionally, an Apgar score (ranging from 0–10, based
      upon assessment of heart rate, respirations, muscle tone, reﬂex irrita-
      bility, and colour) at 1 and 5min is calculated, and used to assess newborn
      babies. However, do not delay resuscitation to calculate the score.
      A healthy baby will have good tone, will cry within a few seconds of
      delivery and have a heart rate of 120–150/min, and will become rapidly
      pink during the ﬁrst 90sec.
      Less healthy babies will have poorer tone, slower heart rates, and may not
      establish adequate respiration by 90–120sec. The most sick will be pale,
      ﬂoppy, apneic, and bradycardic.
      Airway
      Open the airway by placing the baby’s head in the neutral position (with
      the neck neither ﬂexed nor extended). Because of the large occiput,
      this will require a towel under the shoulders of the baby. Avoid hyper-
      extension of the neck as this can occlude the pharyngeal airway. Very
      ﬂoppy babies may also need either chin lift or jaw thrust. Remove visible
      meconium or secretions using a paediatric Yankauer sucker.
      Breathing
      If the baby is not breathing adequately by 90sec, give 5 inﬂation breaths
      (pressures of 30cm water for 2–3sec). Ventilate a term baby with air,
      but use oxygen for premature and/or hypoxic neonates. If the heart rate
      increases, this indicates successful ventilation of the lungs. If the baby is
      apnoeic, continue ventilation at 30–40 breaths/min until self-ventilating. If
      the heart rate does not increase, then the most likely cause is that the
      lungs have not been inﬂated. Recheck head position and consider a jaw
      thrust and longer inﬂation time. If the airway is obstructed, consider an
      oropharyngeal airway, laryngoscopy and suction. Repeat the 5 inﬂation
      breaths. If the heart rate remains <60/min or absent despite good chest
      movement, start chest compressions.
                                     RESUSCITATION OF THE NEWBORN                643

                  Dry the baby                           Birth       AT
        Remove any wet towels and cover
         Start the clock or note the time

     Assess (tone), breathing and heart rate             30 s        ALL

         If gasping or not breathing:
                Open the airway
             Give 5 inflation breaths                                STAGES
            Consider SpO2 monitoring                     60 s

                     Re-assess
            If no increase in heart rate                             ASK:
             look for chest movement

            If chest not moving:                          Acceptable*
             Recheck head position                        pre-ductal SpO2
        Consider 2-person airway control                   2 min 60%
         and other airway manoeuvres                       3 min 70%
            Repeat inflation breaths                       4 min 80%
          Consider SpO2 monitoring                         5 min 85%
              Look for a response                         10 min 90%

            If no increase in heart rate                             DO
             look for chest movement

          When the chest is moving:
           If heart rate is not detectable                           YOU
                or slow (<60 min–1)
              Start chest compressions
          3 compressions to each breath
                                                                     NEED
          Reassess heart rate every 30s
          If heart rate is not detectable
               or slow (<60 min–1)
        consider venous access and drugs                             HELP?

Fig. 15.2 Algorithm for newborn life support. From Resuscitation Council (UK).
Newborn Life Support, 2010. See www.resus.org.uk
644    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Cardiopulmonary resuscitation of the
      newborn
      Chest compression (only to be started after successful lung inﬂation).
      Grip the chest in both hands in such a way that two thumbs can press on
      the lower third of the sternum, (just below the intermammary line) with
      the ﬁngers over the spine at the back (Fig. 15.3). Aim for a rate of 100/min,
      and to depress the antero-posterior (AP) diameter of the chest by a third.
      Use a chest compression to inﬂation ratio of 3:1.

                                Using encircling fingers
      Fig. 15.3 Method of CPR in the newborn.

      Tracheal intubation
      Treat continuing apnoea with tracheal intubation using a 3mm tube
      (2.5mm in premature babies). Precede intubation by pre-oxygenation with
      bag valve mask ventilation for 30sec.
      Drugs
      Only use drugs if there is no signiﬁcant cardiac output despite effective
      lung inﬂation and chest compression. Give drugs intravenously via an
      umbilical vein catheter or intra-osseous needle.
      • Give adrenaline 10mcg/kg (0.1mL/kg of 1 in 10 000 if there is no initial
        response. If this is ineffective the dose may be increased to 30 mcg/kg
        (0.3mL/kg of 1 in 10 000).
      • Give sodium bicarbonate 1–2mmol/kg (2–4mL of 4.2% solution/kg) when
        there is no cardiac output despite all resuscitative efforts or in profound
        or unresponsive bradycardia.
      • Hypoglycaemia is a potential problem for all newborns and BMG is
        unreliable when reading <5mmol/L. Take blood sample to conﬁrm and
        treat immediately with a bolus of 2.5mL/kg of 10% glucose.
            CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION OF THE NEWBORN                        645

• Suspect hypovolaemia if: very pale baby, pulseless electrical activity
  (PEA), history of antepartum haemorrhage, placenta praevia, or vasa
  praevia, or unclamped cord. Give 10mL/kg 0.9% saline followed by
  O –ve blood, repeated as necessary.
• Atropine and calcium have no role in newborn resuscitation.
Venous access—the umbilical vein
The easiest and fastest method of obtaining venous access in the newborn
is to cannulate the umbilical vein. Identify the umbilical vein in the cut
umbilical stump: it is the single large dilated vessel adjacent to the two
constricted arteries (Fig. 15.4). Prepare a 5F gauge catheter with 0.9%
saline and insert it 5cm into the umbilical vein. Suture and secure in place.

     Vein

                                                               Arteries

Fig. 15.4 Diagram of a cross-section of the umbilicus.

If there are no signs of life after 10min of continuous and adequate
resuscitation efforts, then discontinuation of resuscitation may be justiﬁed;
involve senior ED and neonatal staff in this decision.
Meconium aspiration
In the presence of meconium, do not attempt to aspirate the nose and
mouth of meconium as the head presents. If a baby is delivered with thick
meconium and is unresponsive at birth (absent or inadequate respiration,
heart rate <100/min or hypotonia), perform laryngoscopy and clear meco-
nium under direct vision using a wide bore catheter. Aim to intubate the
larynx and apply suction to the tracheal tube which is then withdrawn.
However, if intubation cannot be achieved immediately, clear the
orophyarynx and start bag-valve-mask inﬂation. If while attempting to
clear the airway the heart rate falls <60/min, stop airway clearance, give
inﬂation breaths and start ventilating the baby with a bag-valve-mask
device.
If meconium staining is present, but the infant is vigorous at birth, no
special treatment is required immediately, but the infant should be closely
observed.
646    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric basic life support
      Follow the algorithm (Fig. 15.5). Note that the approach to choking is
      considered on b p.648.
      Evaluate responsiveness
      Check the child’s responsiveness—gently stimulate and ask loudly ‘are you
      alright?’ Do not shake if you suspect cervical spine injury. If the child does
      not respond, shout for help ± get someone to go for assistance.
      Open airway
      Open the airway by head tilt and chin lift. Desirable degrees of tilt are
      neutral <1 year and ‘snifﬁng the morning air’ >1 year. Do not press on the
      soft tissues under the chin as this may block the airway. If it is still difﬁcult
      to open the airway, try a jaw thrust. If there is any suspicion that there
      may have been a neck injury, instruct a second rescuer to manually immo-
      bilize it, and use either chin lift or jaw thrust alone. If this is unsuccessful,
      add the smallest amount of head tilt needed to open the airway.
      Check breathing
      Whilst keeping the airway open, look listen and feel for breathing for
      10sec. If the child is not breathing or is making infrequent irregular breaths,
      carefully remove any obvious obstruction, give 5 initial rescue breaths
      (with the rescuer taking a breath between each rescue breath).
      Rescue breaths
      For children >1 year, whilst maintaining head tilt and chin lift, give breaths
      mouth to mouth, pinching off the nose. Blow steadily for 1–1.5sec
      watching for the chest to rise. Take your mouth away, watch the chest fall
      and repeat this sequence 5 times.
      For the infant (<1 year) ensure the neutral position of the head and apply
      chin lift. Give mouth to mouth and nose breaths, ensuring a good seal.
      Blow steadily for 1–1.5sec watching for chest rise. Take your mouth away,
      watch the chest fall and repeat this sequence 5 times.
      Difﬁculty achieving an effective breath suggests airway obstruction. Open
      the mouth and remove visible obstruction (no blind ﬁnger sweep), ensure
      appropriate head tilt/chin lift and neck position. Try a jaw thrust if head
      tilt/chin lift has not worked. Try up to 5 times to give effective breaths. If
      still unsuccessful, move to chest compression.
      Check pulse
      Over the next 10sec check for signs of life: any movement, coughing or
      normal breathing and check for a pulse (use carotid for >1yr and brachial
      for those <1 year). If there are no signs of life and/or no pulse or pulse
      <60/min with poor perfusion or you are unsure: start chest compression.
      Chest compression
      For infants, perform chest compressions (100–120/min) by placing both
      thumbs ﬂat side by side on the lower third of the sternum with the tips
      pointing towards the infant’s head. Encircle the rib cage with tips of ﬁngers
      supporting the infant’s back. Press down with thumbs at least one third of
      the depth of the chest.
      In children >1 year using the heel of one hand, compress the lower half
      of the sternum by at least one-third of the depth of the chest at a rate of
      100–120/min. Use two hands if necessary to achieve the depth required.
                                           PAEDIATRIC BASIC LIFE SUPPORT        647

                                  Unresponsive?

                                  Shout for help

                                   Open airway

                             Not breathing normally?

                                 5 rescue breaths

                                 No signs of life?

                             15 chest compressions

                                 2 rescue breaths
                                 15 compressions

                           Call resuscitation team
Fig. 15.5 Paediatric basic life support (healthcare professionals with a duty
to respond). Resuscitation Council (UK). Paediatric basic life support, 2010.
See www.resus.org.uk
648    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Choking from a foreign body
      Despite preventative measures (eg making pen tops with holes in them),
      children continue to die each year from airway obstruction due to FB
      impaction. FB aspiration produces a sudden onset airway problem and
      must be distinguished from other causes of airway obstruction (epiglot-
      titis, bacterial tracheitis see b Stridor: upper respiratory tract infections,
      p.677), which may be worsened by the basic measures described below.
      The majority of choking events in children are witnessed and occur during
      play or whilst eating. FB airway obstruction is characterized by sudden
      onset of respiratory distress associated with coughing, gagging or stridor
      with no other signs of illness. If the child is coughing effectively (fully
      responsive, loud cough, able to take a breath before coughing, crying or
      verbal response to questions), encourage coughing and observe for the
      cough becoming ineffective.
      Conscious, but ineffective cough
      If conscious with an ineffective cough, give 5 back blows. In the infant,
      support in a head downwards prone position and in the child aim for a
      head down or forward leaning position. Deliver 5 sharp back blows with
      the heel of one hand centrally between the shoulder blades. If ineffective,
      turn to supine position and give 5 chest thrusts to infants (using the same
      landmarks as for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), but thrusts are
      sharper and delivered at a slower rate) and abdominal thrusts to children
      >1 year. Perform abdominal thrusts from behind the child, placing your ﬁst
      between the umbilicus and xiphisternum, and grasping it with your other
      hand, then pulling sharply inwards and upwards—repeat up to 5 times.
      Following chest or abdominal thrusts, if the object has not been expelled
      and the victim is still conscious then repeat the sequence of back blows
      and chest (for infant) or abdominal (for children) thrusts.
      Do not use abdominal thrusts for infants.
      Unconscious from foreign body airway obstruction
      If a child with FB airway obstruction is or becomes unconscious, place him
      on a ﬂat surface, then open the mouth and look for any obvious object. If
      one is seen, use a single ﬁnger sweep to remove it. It may be possible to
      remove the FB with Magill’s forceps under direct laryngoscopy. Do not
      attempt blind or repeated ﬁnger sweeps. Open the airway and attempt
      5 rescue breaths. If a breath does not make the chest rise, reposition
      the head before making the next attempt. If there is no response whilst
      attempting the 5 rescue breaths, proceed to chest compression with
      ventilation using a ratio of 15:2. Each time the airway is opened, check for
      a foreign body and if visible, try to remove it (Fig. 15.6).
      If it appears that the obstruction has been relieved, open and check
      the airway. If the child is not breathing, deliver rescue breaths. If initial
      measures prove unsuccessful and the child is hypoxic, oxygenate via a
      surgical airway until senior help arrives. Perform needle cricothyroidotomy
      in children aged <12 years, surgical cricothyroidotomy in older children
      (b Airway obstruction: surgical airway, p.326).
                                       CHOKING FROM A FOREIGN BODY                      649

                                       Assess severity

              Ineffective cough                               Effective cough

    Unconscious             Conscious                       Encourage cough
                           5 back blows                    Continue to check for
     Open airway
                             5 thrusts                   deterioration to ineffective
      5 breaths
                         (chest for infant)              cough or until obstruction
      Start CPR
                          (abdominal for                          relieved
                           child >1 year)

Fig. 15.6 Paediatric foreign body airway obstruction treatment. Resuscitation
Council (UK). Paediatric FB airway obstruction, 2010. See www.resus.org.uk
650    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Anaphylaxis in children
      The background, causes and pathophysiology of anaphylaxis in children
      is similar to that in adults—see b p.42. Treat according to the 2008 UK
      Resuscitation Council algorithm, shown in Fig. 15.7. After initial treatment,
      admit the child for observation in case of a delayed or biphasic reaction.

                                        Anaphylactic reaction?

                     Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, Exposure

                    Diagnosis - look for:
                       • Acute onset of illness
                       • Life-threatening airway and/or breathing
                         and/or circulation problems1
                       • And usually skin changes

                                             Call for help
                                           • Lie patient flat
                                           • Raise patient’s legs

                                               Adrenaline2

                             When skills and equipment available:
                      • Establish airway
                      • High flow oxygen            Monitor:
                      • IV fluid challenge3         • Pulse oximetry
                      • Chlorphenamine4             • ECG
                      • Hydrocortisone5             • Blood pressure

       1 Life-threatening problems:
       Airway:        Swelling, hoarseness, stridor
       Breathing:     Rapid breathing, wheeze, fatigue, cyanosis, SpO2 < 92%, confusion
       Circulation: Pale, clammy, low blood pressure, faintness, drowsy/coma
        2 Adrenaline (give IM unless experienced with IV adrenaline)      3 IV fluid challenge:
        IM doses of 1:1000 adrenaline (repeat after 5 min if no better)
                                                                          Adult - 500–1000 mL
        • Adult:                     500 micrograms IM (0.5 mL)
                                                                          Child - crystalloid 20 mL/kg
        • Child more than 12 years: 500 micrograms IM (0.5 mL)
        • Child 6–12 years:          300 micrograms IM (0.3 mL)           Stop IV colloid
        • Child less than 6 years:   150 micrograms IM (0.15 mL)          if this might be the cause
         Adrenaline IV to be given only by experienced specialists        of anaphylaxis
           Titrate: Adults 50 micrograms; Children 1 microgram/kg
                                              4 Chlorphenamine             5 Hydrocortisone
                                                 (IM or slow IV)             (IM or slow IV)
       Adult or child more than 12 years             10 mg                       200 mg
       Child 6–12 years                                5 mg                      100 mg
       Child 6 months to 6 years                     2.5 mg                      50 mg
       Child less than 6months                 250 micrograms/kg                  25 mg

      Fig. 15.7 UK Resuscitation Council algorithm 2008.
      1 See http://www.resus.org.uk/pages/reaction.pdf for details. Notes are shown opposite.
                                          ANAPHYLAXIS IN CHILDREN             651

Notes for anaphylaxis algorithm opposite
1 Intramuscular (IM) adrenaline is the agent of choice in anaphylaxis and
  should be administered without delay.
2 If profound shock is judged immediately life-threatening, consider giving
  a slow bolus of 1mcg/kg of intravenous (IV) adrenaline as a 1 in 100,000
  solution (= 10micrograms/mL solution). This is hazardous and is recom-
  mended only for experienced specialists who can also obtain IV access
  without delay. Note that a different dilution of adrenaline is required
  for IM compared to IV use. Adrenaline can also be given via the IO
  route in the same dose as the IV route.
3 An inhaled B2-agonist such as salbutamol may be used as an adjunctive
  measure if bronchospasm is severe and does not respond rapidly to
  other treatment.
4 For children who have been prescribed an EpiPen®, 150 mcg can be
  given instead of 120 mcg, and 300 mcg can be given instead of 250 mcg
  or 500 mcg.
5 Crystalloid may be safer than a colloid.
6 Do not use the subcutaneous route for adrenaline. It has no role in
  anaphylaxis because its absorption is appreciably slower than IM
  adrenaline.
Consider taking blood samples for mast cell tryptase testing as soon as
possible after starting treatment if the cause is thought to be venom-
related, drug-related or idiopathic (see www.nice.org.uk/cg134):
• A sample as soon as possible after emergency treatment has started.
• A second sample ideally within 1–2 hours (but no later than 4 hours)
  from the onset of symptoms.
652    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric advanced life support
      Overall, cardiac arrest in children has a worse outcome than in adults,
      because the underlying causes are different. However, the situation is
      likely to be far from hopeless if a child arrests within the ED or other
      areas of the hospital. Effective immediate resuscitation is important to
      minimize hypoxic organ damage. Early recognition of the child presenting
      with impending cardio-respiratory arrest may allow prompt intervention
      and prevent secondary cardiac arrest (Fig. 15.8).
      Follow the guidelines shown opposite. Establish BLS (b p.646) and use
      a ratio of 15:2 while ventilating with a bag-valve-mask. Aim for tracheal
      intubation by a highly skilled operator as soon as possible, then ventilate
      at a rate of 10–12/min with compressions uninterrupted at 100–120/min.
      Non-shockable rhythm: PEA and asystole
      Give BLS with high concentration O2. Give adrenaline IV/IO 10mcg/kg
      (0.1mL/kg of 1 in 10,000). If no other access is present, consider giving
      100mcg/kg adrenaline via the trachea, but this is the least satisfactory
      route. Give IV/IO adrenaline every 3–5min (every other loop). As in adults
      (b p.51), PEA may reﬂect a correctable underlying cause.
      In particular, exclude tension pneumothorax and consider hypovolaemia.
      Haemorrhage, septic shock, and dehydration are implicated relatively
      frequently, so consider an initial IV ﬂuid bolus of 20mL/kg 0.9% saline
      early in the resuscitation. Follow this with further IV ﬂuid/blood if
      hypovolaemia is still present or suspected. If circulation returns, ventilate
      at 12–20breaths/min to achieve a normal pCO2 and monitor ETCO2 to
      conﬁrm correct tracheal tube placement.
      Shockable rhythm: VF/pulseless VT
      VF is uncommon in children, but is more likely in witnessed and sudden
      collapse. It occasionally occurs in children with congenital heart disease,
      hypothermia or electrolyte disturbance. Follow the ‘VF/VT’ treatment
      algorithm shown opposite. Give one shock of 4J/kg if using a manual
      deﬁbrillator. These energy levels are appropriate for both monophasic
      and biphasic deﬁbrillators. When selecting the energy level to use during
      deﬁbrillation, if the deﬁbrillator can only deliver certain predetermined
      ‘stepped’ shocks, choose the nearest higher ‘step’ to that required. Pads
      or paddles for children should be 8–12cm in size and 4.5cm for infants.
      Resume CPR immediately without reassessing rhythm or feeling for a
      pulse. Continue CPR for 2min and if still in VF/VT, give a second shock
      and resume CPR immediately for 2min. Consider reversible causes. If still
      in VF/VT at this time, give a third shock. Give adrenaline 10 mcg/kg and
      amiodarone 5mg/kg (diluted in 5% glucose) once chest compressions have
      restarted and give a fourth shock after 2min CPR. Continue giving shocks
      every 2min and adrenaline immediately before every other shock (ie every
      3–5min), until a return of spontaneous circulation. Amiodarone 5mg/kg
      can be repeated once after the ﬁfth shock. Uninterrupted good quality
      CPR is vital—only interrupt chest compressions and ventilation for
      deﬁbrillation.
      See b Paediatric advanced life support notes, p.654.
                                           PAEDIATRIC ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT                             653

                                           Unresponsive?
                                          Not breathing or
                                        only occasional gasps

                                                CPR                                        Call
                                   (5 initial breaths then 15:2)                   resuscitation team
                                     Attach defibrillator/monitor                   (1 min CPR first,
                                       Minimise interruptions                           if alone)

                                                 Assess
                                                 rhythm

         Shockable                                                            Non-Shockable
       (VF/Pulseless VT)                                                       (PEA/Asystole)

                                                Return of
            1 Shock
                                              spontaneous
              4J/kg
                                               circulation

     Immediately resume                Immediate post cardiac                Immediately resume
       CPR for 2 min                     arrest treatment                      CPR for 2 min
    Minimise interruptions             • Use ABCDE approach                 Minimise interruptions
                                       • Controlled oxygenation and
                                         ventilation
                                       • Investigations
                                       • Treat precipitating cause
                                       • Temperature control
                                       • Therapeutic hypothermia?

                   During CPR                                     Reversible causes
    • Ensure high-quality CPR: rate, depth, recoil        • Hypoxia
    • Plan actions before interrupting CPR                • Hypovolaemia
    • Give oxygen                                         • Hypo-/hyperkalaemia/metabolic
    • Vascular access (intravenous, intraosseous)         • Hypothermia
    • Give adrenaline every 3–5 min
    • Consider advanced airway and capnography            • Tension pneumothorax
    • Continuous chest compressions when advanced         • Toxins
      airway in place                                     • Tamponade - cardiac
    • Correct reversible causes                           • Thromboembolism

Fig. 15.8 Paediatric advanced life support. Resuscitation Council (UK). Paediatric
advanced life support guidelines, 2010. Available at: www.resus.org.uk
654    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric advanced life support notes
      Airway
      O2 Give high ﬂow oxygen (use a well-ﬁtting mask with a reservoir).
      Suction Use a rigid suction catheter to aspirate pharyngeal contents.
      Oropharyngeal airway An airway may help when ventilating with a bag
      valve mask device while personnel and equipment are prepared for
      tracheal intubation. Size the airway by matching its length to the distance
      between the central incisor teeth and the angle of the mandible. Use a
      tongue depressor or laryngoscope to displace the large tongue and insert
      the airway the ‘right way up’ in order to avoid trauma to the palate.
      Bag-valve-mask ventilation Attach high ﬂow O2 to a self-inﬂating bag-valve-
      mask device. Use a 500mL (up to age 1 year) or 1600mL bag (>1 year).
      Tracheal intubation This method of securing the airway requires experience
      and practice. Call for senior help. Always use a capnograph. Follow the
      same technique as that described for adults (b p.324), except:
      • Use a straight-bladed laryngoscope in infants (<1 year).
      • Use correct size of endotracheal (ET) tubes in children, either cuffed or
        uncuffed.
      • Correct size of ET tube: internal diameter (mm) = (age in years/4) + 4
      If intubation is not achieved within 30sec, ventilate with high ﬂow O2 via
      bag-valve-mask. Consider a rescue airway, such as a laryngeal mask.
      Equipment sizes, drugs, and doses
      Become familiar with and use the Broselow tape. See Box 15.1 for key
      formulae
      Venous access First attempt to secure peripheral venous access. If this is
      not obtained within 90sec, attempt intra-osseous access (b p.640).
      High dose adrenaline is not recommended and may be harmful. Consider it
      only in exceptional circumstances.
      Atropine 20mcg/kg (minimum dose 100mcg, max 600 mcg) may be used
      for patients with bradycardia related to increased vagal tone. There is no
      evidence of efﬁcacy for atropine.
      Magnesium is indicated for polymorphic VT or documented
      hypomagnesaemia—give 25–50mg/kg over several min to a max of 2g.
      Calcium chloride (0.2mL/kg of 10% solution) is given for hypocalcaemia,
      hyperkalaemia and clinically severe overdose of calcium channel blocking
      drugs. Do not give in the same IV/IO line as bicarbonate.
      Sodium bicarbonate is not recommended routinely, but consider it in
      prolonged arrest, hyperkalaemia, and arrhythmias associated with tricyclic
      antidepressant overdose. The dose is 1–2mL/kg of 8.4% solution IV/IO.
      Ensure adequate ﬂushing after giving it. Avoid mixing with other agents
      (it inactivates adrenaline and precipitates out calcium).
      Glucose Treat hypoglycaemia with IV glucose (0.5g/kg).
      IV ﬂuids Give a 20mL/kg IV normal saline bolus where cardiac arrest is
      secondary to hypovolaemia or sepsis.
                                PAEDIATRIC ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT NOTES        655

Discontinuing resuscitation
Resuscitation efforts are unlikely to be successful if there is no return
of spontaneous circulation at any time after 30min of life support and in
the absence of recurring or refractory VF/VT. Prolong resuscitation for
patients who are hypothermic or who may have been poisoned.
Paediatric resuscitation chart (Fig. 15.9)
        Length                 50 60   80 100 120        140    150     cm
                          14
                          12
                          10
                           8
                          6

            Age (years)
                          4
                          2
                          1
            9 months
            6 months
            3 months

                  Weight        5      10   20      30         40     50 kg
Fig. 15.9

 Box 15.1 Key resuscitation formulae
 Assume birth weight of 3.5kg, reaching 10kg by the end of the ﬁrst year
 Weight in kg = (age in years + 4) x 2 {works for ages 1–10 years}
 Tracheal tube internal diameter in mm = (age/4) + 4
 Tracheal tube length (oral) in cm = (age/2) +12
 Laryngeal mask sizes for children:
 • Size 1 for weight up to 5kg.
 • Size 1.5 for weight 5–10kg.
 • Size 2 for weight 10–20kg.
 • Size 2.5 for weight >20kg.
 IV ﬂuid challenge 20mL/kg
 Deﬁbrillation for VF/pulseless VT = 4J/kg

 Drug doses
 • Glucose in hypoglycaemia: 5mL/kg of 10% (2.5mL in neonates).
 • Adrenaline IV in cardiac arrest: 0.1mL/kg of 1 in 10,000.
 • Lorazepam IV for seizures: 0.1mg/kg.
 • Diazepam PR for seizures: 0.5mg/kg.
 • Midazolam buccal for seizures: 0.5mg/kg.
 • Phenytoin IVI for continuing seizures: 18mg/kg IVI over 30min.
 • Morphine for pain: IV 0.1–0.2mg/kg (titrated according to pain).
656    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Children with abnormal heart rates or
      rhythms
      Background
      Arrhythmias are uncommon: obtain expert advice at an early stage.
      Children may present with poor feeding, heart failure, shock or palpita-
      tions. Sinus tachycardia may be as fast as 220/min in infants and 180/min in
      children. Consider undiagnosed congenital heart disease in infants.
      Bradycardia
      Heart rates of <60/min are usually pre-terminal events in response to pro-
      found hypoxia and ischaemia, but can be due to i ICP or poisoning. Treat
      the underlying cause and if the child is shocked and <60/min start CPR,
      give O2 and ventilate as necessary. Give IV 20mL/kg ﬂuid bolus. If this is
      ineffective, give adrenaline 10mcg/kg IV.
      If the bradycardia is due to vagal stimulation (eg tracheal intubation or
      tracheal suctioning), give atropine 20mcg/kg (minimum dose 100mcg, max
      600mcg).
      Ventricular tachycardia in children
      Until proved otherwise, initially consider wide complex tachycardia in
      children to be VT.
      • Causes of VT: hyperkalaemia, long QT syndrome. Tricyclic poisoning
        (p192) often produces a tachycardia and wide QRS resembling VT.
      • Children with VT and who are clinically shocked but conscious require
        urgent anaesthesia followed by synchronized shocks starting at 1J/kg
        (followed if necessary by 2J/kg).
      • If the child is not clinically shocked, involve a (paediatric) cardiologist and
        consider amiodarone 5mg/kg IVI over 60 min.
      • Torsades de pointes is treated with magnesium sulphate IVI 25–50mg/kg
        (up to a maximum of 2g); seek expert guidance.
      SVT in children
      Distinguish SVT from sinus tachycardia (where heart rate is <200/min,
      P waves are upright in ECG leads I and AVF, there is beat to beat variation
      in rate, and history consistent with shock).
      If clinically shocked, but responsive, obtain expert help to give
      synchronized shocks (starting at 1J/kg, increasing if unsuccessful to 2J/kg)
      under anaesthesia. If there is any delay, try adenosine IV as outlined for
      haemodynamically stable patients.
      In the absence of clinical evidence of shock, try vagal stimulation: immersion
      of the face in iced water, or Valsalva manoeuvre or unilateral carotid
      massage. If this is unsuccessful, give adenosine 100mcg/kg rapid IV
      followed by a saline ﬂush, followed if still unsuccessful by further dose(s)
      at 200mcg/kg, then 300mcg/kg. If this fails, seek expert help and consider
      IV amiodarone.
This page intentionally left blank
658    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
      SIDS (also called SUDI—sudden unexplained death in infancy; previously
      known as ‘cot death’ or ‘crib death’) is decreasing in incidence, but
      each death is a tragedy. A senior doctor (consultant) should manage
      distressed parents (and staff). It remains a leading cause of infant death
      (1 in 2000 live births), 90% occurring between 1 and 6 months of age. Most
      hospitals now have detailed SUDIC (Sudden Unexpected Death in Infancy
      and Childhood) protocols, which should be followed in this situation.
      Deﬁnition Sudden death in infancy with no cause identiﬁed after autopsy.
      Aetiology Although the aetiology is unknown, a variety of theories have
      been proposed, including prone sleeping position, airway obstruction,
      apnoea, viral illness, and overheating.
      Risk factors Passive smoking, males, winter months, sleeping prone,
      premature babies, twins, apnoeic spells in ﬁrst week of life, lower
      socio-economic groups, maternal illicit drug abuse in pregnancy, sibling
      with SIDS.
      Prevention
      • Avoid overheating (aim for ambient T° of 16–20°C).
      • Avoid duvets and excess bedding in infancy.
      • Place infant’s feet at cot end to prevent migration under blankets.
      • Sleep supine (unless Pierre–Robin, scoliosis, or oesophageal reﬂux).
      • Consider apnoea alarm.
      • Avoid infant sharing bed with parent.
      Approach
      • Take the infant into the resuscitation room and continue resuscitation
        as for cardiac arrest unless there is post-mortem staining or rigidity.
      • Call the ED consultant and consultant paediatrician.
      • Ensure that a named senior nurse stays with the parents.
      • Immediately death is declared, prepare yourself, then inform the parents
        in the presence of the senior nurse. Use the techniques described in
        b Breaking bad news, p.24. Refer to the child throughout by their ﬁrst
        name.
      • Some hospitals have dedicated bereavement counsellors—involve them
        early.
      • Allow the parents to see and hold the baby, and suggest that they keep
        a lock of their hair.
      • Take digital or polaroid photographs of the baby: give them to the
        parents and ﬁle copies in the notes.
      • Explain further procedures (eg autopsy) to the parents and provide
        written information eg ‘A guide to the post mortem examination proce-
        dure involving a baby or child’ (DoH ref 29768/A).
      • Offer to request a minister of religion and involve a social worker.
      • Careful documentation including general appearance, state of nutrition,
        weight, rectal temperature (T°), marks from procedures, rashes, any
        visible injuries, and appearance of the retinae.
      • Inform GP to arrange to visit parents and discuss whether to suppress
        lactation with bromocriptine if mother is breast-feeding.
                          SUDDEN INFANT DEATH SYNDROME (SIDS)                   659

• Retain clothes and bedding (stored in a paper bag, not polythene) and
  inform police and coroner (Procurator Fiscal in Scotland) in all cases.
• Ensure blood, urine, and skin specimens will be obtained (looking for
  infection and inborn errors of metabolism).
• Arrange a further appointment for the parents with the same consultant
  paediatrician.
• Suggest the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths, which has various
  leaﬂets and a ‘Cot Death Helpline’ (Telephone 0870 787 0554).
• Advise about preventative measures for siblings. If the baby was a
  twin, recommend admission of the surviving twin with the mother for
  monitoring and investigation.
• Cancel any hospital outpatient appointments and vaccination
  appointments for the child.
• Inform the parents that the police will visit them as a matter of course.
• Finally, consider yourself and your colleagues.
Staff have feelings too
All staff involved with the child and family (ambulance staff, police,
GP, nurses and doctors—including you) will be traumatized by the
experience. Those who are themselves parents with young children may
be particularly distressed. At the very least, a debrieﬁng session over a
cup of coffee will be required.
‘Near miss sudden infant death syndrome’ (apparently life-
threatening event)
Refer to the paediatrician for admission and monitoring any infant whose
parents report an apparently life-threatening event (‘ALTE’): apnoea,
colour change, tone change, cyanosis, choking, gagging. The patient may
appear well at the time of presentation. Liaise with the paediatric team
and take blood (to include FBC, U&E, glucose, calcium, magnesium,
phosphate) and admit for apnoea monitoring.
The differential diagnosis includes arrhythmias and congenital heart disease,
child abuse, gastro-oesophageal reﬂux, meningitis and sepsis, seizures and
metabolic disorders. In 50% of cases, no cause is found. Despite parental
anxiety, short apnoeic episodes (<15sec) may, in fact, be entirely normal.
Theophylline, home monitoring devices, and counselling have all been
used for infants believed to be at risk.
660    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Problems of neonates and infants
      Neonatal cephalhaematoma
      This haematoma results from birth trauma and overlies a single skull bone
      (usually parietal). It resolves spontaneously: do not attempt to aspirate.
      Umbilical cord sepsis
      The dried cord separates at 1 week. If the stump develops signs of
      infection (becoming moist and red), refer to the paediatrician.
      Breast swelling
      Neonatal breasts commonly swell, due to exposure to maternal
      hormones. Occasionally, these breasts lactate (‘witch’s milk’) and very
      occasionally become infected, requiring parenteral antibiotics.
      Neonatal jaundice
      Jaundice within 24hr of birth is highly abnormal. Neonates who develop
      jaundice after 24hr mostly have ‘physiological jaundice’ (typically in the
      ﬁrst week, especially premature babies) or ‘breast milk jaundice’ (typically
      in second week: self-limiting, breast feeding can usually continue). Refer
      all patients to exclude serious underlying disorders: Rhesus haemolytic
      disease; ABO incompatibility; congenital spherocytosis; glucose-6-
      phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PD) deﬁciency; CMV infection; hypothy-
      roidism; biliary atresia. The paediatrician will check: serum bilirubin
      (including ratio of conjugated: unconjugated), FBC; blood ﬁlm; U&E; LFTs;
      direct antiglobulin test; TFTs; and infection screen.
      Neonatal conjunctivitis
      A watery/sticky eye in the ﬁrst few days of life may be due to an unopened
      tear duct, or occasionally to gonococcal or chlamydial infection acquired
      from the mother’s genital tract. Therefore, take a swab for Gram staining
      for gonococci and culture for chlamydia. Refer the baby and mother if
      organisms are demonstrated, otherwise arrange GP follow-up.
      Sepsis
      Potentially life-threatening sepsis (eg meningitis) may present in a non-
      speciﬁc manner in infants (this is especially true of neonates). Classic presen-
      tations are replaced by: feeding problems, irritability, drowsiness, jaundice,
      hypotonia, poor weight gain, petechiae or skin rash, apnoea, bradycardia,
      and cyanotic episodes. Neonates at i risk are those with low birth weight,
      those previously ventilated and those with congenital abnormalities.
      Treatment Give O2 and IV ﬂuids (20mL/kg). Refer for admission and
      urgent investigation: BMG, urine culture, FBC, blood cultures, TORCH
      screen (Toxoplasma, Rubella, CMV, Herpes), CXR, abdominal X-ray (if
      necrotizing enterocolitis suspected), LP. Commence ‘blind’ antibiotics
      (see BNFC).
                              PROBLEMS OF NEONATES AND INFANTS                  661

Crying babies
It is quite normal for babies to cry. The amount of crying varies
enormously, as does the ability of parents to cope with it. With more
acute onset of irritability and crying exclude an acute cause (eg otitis
media, incarcerated hernia, testicular torsion, intussusception, fractured
limb), before reassuring and counselling the parents. Parents who are
driven to despair may beneﬁt from a self-help group (eg CRY-SIS 020
7404 5011 www.cry-sis.com) or follow-up with a paediatrician.
Feeding difﬁculties
Parents bring their babies to the ED with a variety of feeding problems.
The underlying causes vary widely and range from acute life-threatening
sepsis to chronic parental anxiety or overfeeding. Obtain a careful feeding
history and watch the baby feed. Babies normally require at least 15mL of
milk/kg/day at day 1, increasing to |150mL/kg/day by day 7. Plot weight,
height, and head circumference on centile charts. Take weight loss or
failure to satisfactorily gain weight seriously—it may be due to a signiﬁcant
underlying disorder (eg pyloric stenosis). Remember that newborn babies
lose up to 10% of their birth weight in the ﬁrst week, but should regain it
by 2 weeks. Arrange for the health visitor to advise. Refer chronic feeding
problems to GP or paediatrician.
Bilious vomiting
Occasionally neonates and infants present with bilious vomiting, a
sign of serious pathology. The most important differential diagnosis is
intestinal malrotation (volvulus) secondary to peritoneal bands, which
requires emergency laparotomy to avoid total small bowel infarction
(b Abdominal pain in children, p.698). Consult a paediatric surgeon
urgently. Other differential diagnoses include an obstructed hernia,
Hirschsprung’s disease or sepsis.
Metabolic diseases (inborn errors of metabolism)
Occasionally neonates present to the ED days after birth with coma or
seizures with no obvious cause (infection, trauma, hypoglycaemia, etc.).
These infants may have an inborn error of metabolism (e.g. maple syrup
urine disease, urea cycle disorders, and hyperammonaemia) and they
require urgent specialist paediatric care, often at a tertiary children’s
hospital. If an older child presents to the ED with a previously diagnosed
metabolic disease, seek expert advice by referring to the paediatricians
early. Remember the parents will know more about the disease than you.
Treatment Give O2 and IV ﬂuids (20mL/kg) and treat hypoglycaemia, and
sepsis. Refer for admission and urgent investigation by a paediatrician.
Emergency treatment protocols for this challenging group of patients are
available at the British Inherited Metabolic Disease Group website (http://
www.bimdg.org.uk/protocols/documents.asp?o=1&tid=1).
662    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Skin problems in infants
      Minor skin problems are common in infants. The combination of a
      skin rash and an ill infant should arouse suspicion of serious illness (eg
      b Meningococcal disease, p.666) and prompt urgent referral. Do not
      discharge an infant with an undiagnosed rash—obtain an expert opinion.
      Neonates
      Multiple tiny white papules (milia) seen on the face of neonates are super-
      ﬁcial epidermal inclusion cysts. Erythematous lesions with central white
      vesicles are common in the ﬁrst days of life—erythema toxicum (‘neonatal
      urticaria’). Both are harmless and disappear spontaneously within days.
      Peeling skin
      Peeling skin is a common feature of post-mature babies and should be dis-
      tinguished from scalded skin syndrome and Kawasaki disease (b p.672).
      Scalded skin syndrome (‘toxic epidermal necrolysis’)
      This staphylococcal infection results in red peeling skin, sometimes with
      blistering. Refer for admission and IV antibiotics.
      Eczema
      Usually managed most appropriately by GP and outpatient department
      with emollients ± topical corticosteroids, but if very severe, refer for a
      period of inpatient treatment. Sometimes the scratched skin becomes
      secondarily infected, requiring admission for IV antibiotics.
      Impetigo
      Any breach in the skin (eg eczema, nappy rash, scabies) may develop
      impetigo. Staphylococcal or streptococcal infection results in an ulcera-
      tive erythematous area, which forms a golden brown crust that spreads
      rapidly. If the infection is localized and the child is well, treat with topical
      fucidic acid (if extensive—oral penicillin and ﬂucloxacillin), arrange GP
      follow-up and advise the parents to isolate the child from other children
      until it has resolved. If the child is unwell, refer for IV antibiotics.
      Nappy rash (‘ammoniacal dermatitis’)
      Erythema with some ulceration in the nappy area, but sparing the ﬂexures,
      is usually the result of excessive moisture contact with the skin. Treat
      by exposure to fresh air as much as practicable and frequent changing of
      nappies. Consider barrier creams (see BNFC).
      Monilial infection
      Nappy rash may become infected with Candida albicans, leading to erythema
      of the ﬂexures. Give nystatin cream and advise regular changing.
      Seborrhoeic dermatitis
      This erythematous greasy rash commonly involves the nappy area, the
      occipital region and behind the ears. It may become infected with Candida
      albicans—treat with nystatin and refer to GP.
                                                                     THE FEBRILE CHILD             663

The febrile child
Febrile illness is extremely common in childhood and many parents will
bring their child to the emergency department, rather than to a primary
care team for assessment, particularly when they feel the child is very
unwell. Primary care teams will also refer febrile children to hospital for
assessment when the child is seriously ill or the diagnosis is in doubt.
Approach
• Assess the airway, breathing and circulation of the child to identify and
  treat life-threatening problems as they are found in order to maintain
  vital functions before disease speciﬁc therapies are started (b Primary
  assessment and resuscitation of the sick child, p.634).
• Involve senior ED staff, PICU, and senior paediatric staff as soon as you
  suspect the child is critically unwell.
• Measure and record the temperature (electronic thermometer in
  axilla if <4 weeks old, can also use tympanic thermometer if older
  than 4 weeks).
• Speciﬁcally look for an impaired conscious level and lack of recognition
  of parents/carers. Check BMG in all sick children.
• Early recognition and treatment of respiratory failure and shock is
  essential to avoid cardiorespiratory arrest.
• Administer oxygen to maintain SpO2>94%.
• Give a bolus of IV/IO 0.9% saline 20mL/kg if any signs of shock (tachy-
  cardia, CRT>2sec, mottled skin, purpuric rash, d conscious level).
• If there is any suspicion or sign of meningococcal disease, administer
  parenteral benzylpenicillin or cefotaxime as soon as possible.
• If the child is <3 months old, check FBC, blood cultures, CRP and
  urine; if unwell, or WCC <5 or >15 × 109/L, or <1 month old, perform
  lumbar puncture (LP) and give parenteral antibiotics. If <1 month old,
  add ampicillin to cover Listeria.
• If the child is >3 months old, check FBC, blood cultures, CRP and urine;
  get CXR if T°>39°C or WCC>20 × 109/L or clinically unwell.
• Check U&E, ABG, and lactate if clinically unwell or drowsy.
• Consider LP if clinically unwell and febrile at any age, especially <1 year.
• If drowsy or d conscious level, consider adding IV acyclovir to cover
  possibility of herpes simplex encephalitis.
• Resuscitate aggressively with repeated IV ﬂuid boluses, inotropes and
  early ventilation for children with d conscious level.
• In older children, do not forget rarer causes of fever and impaired
  conscious level, including illicit drugs such as MDMA (‘Ecstasy’) or other
  amphetamines, or ketamine.
• Get a detailed history of the illness from parents and carers at the
  earliest opportunity; remember the vaccination history and any recent
  travel, or recent illness in the child’s family or school.

1 See the ‘NICE Guidance on Feverish Illness in Children’. Available at: http://www.nice.org.uk/
  nicemedia/live/11010/30524/30524.pdf
664    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Purpuric rashes
      The development of a purpuric rash in a child is often greeted with
      considerable and understandable parental alarm, due to the well-
      publicized association with meningococcal disease. History, examination,
      and FBC will help to identify the cause.
      Causes of purpuric lesions
      • Meningococcal disease.
      • Henoch–Schönlein purpura.
      • Thrombocytopenia.
         • Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura;
         • Leukaemia;
         • Septic shock;
         • Aplastic anaemia.
      • Some viral illnesses.
      • Trauma.
      • Forceful coughing or vomiting may cause petechiae of the face.
      Meningococcal disease (see b p.666)
      Presume that an ill child (particularly an infant) who develops a purpuric
      rash has meningococcal meningitis/septicaemia and treat urgently for this.
      Henoch–Schönlein purpura
      This vasculitic process affects small arteries in the kidneys, skin, and GI
      tract. It is relatively common in 4–11-year olds and appears to follow a
      viral or bacterial infection. Erythematous macules develop into palpable
      purpuric lesions, which are characteristically concentrated over the
      buttocks and extensor surfaces of the lower limbs, although the distribution
      can be atypical in younger children. Associated symptoms include
      abdominal pain, testicular pain and joint pains (arthritis in ankles and
      knees). Nephritis may occur, producing micro- or macroscopic haematuria,
      proteinuria. Very occasionally, this progresses to renal failure.
      Check BP, urinalysis, urine microscopy, FBC (platelets are normal), U&E.
      Refer to the paediatrician.
      Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
      Probably results from autoimmune reaction to preceding viral infection.
      Presents with a purpuric rash, mucous membrane bleeding, conjunctival
      haemorrhage and occasionally, GI bleeding. Check FBC (platelets are
      <30 × 109/L). Refer for investigation and follow-up. In the presence of
      lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly, consider alternative diagnoses.
      Treatment is usually expectant, since the natural course is for most cases
      to resolve spontaneously over 3 months. Occasionally, life-threatening
      haemorrhage occurs: obtain expert help, resuscitate with O2 and IV ﬂuids
      and give platelets.
      Acute leukaemia
      This may present acutely to the ED with purpura associated with throm-
      bocytopenia. Look for hepatomegaly, splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy.
      FBC/blood ﬁlm reveals anaemia with blast cells, d platelets, and i WBC).
      Refer for admission.
This page intentionally left blank
666    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Meningococcal disease
      See algorithm Fig. 15.10 b p.668–9.
      Meningococcal disease is unpredictable. Most children present acutely
      febrile and may not have a rash in the early stages.
      Septicaemia
      Children presenting with septicaemia may have:
      • A history of fever/rigors but be afebrile at the time of presentation.
      • Isolated severe limb pain in the absence of any other physical signs.
      • Abdominal pain, diarrhoea and vomiting are common in septicaemia.
      • Alertness until late in the illness.
      Patients presenting in septic shock without meningitis have the worst
      prognosis.
      Meningitis
      Young children may present with fever, vomiting, irritability and confusion.
      Those aged <2 years are less likely to have neck stiffness or photophobia.
      Take parental concerns about a child’s responsiveness and alertness
      seriously. Older children typically present more classically with fever,
      vomiting, headache, stiff neck and photophobia. Teenagers may present
      with a change of behaviour (eg confusion, aggression), which may be
      falsely attributed to alcohol or drugs.
      Rash
      Underlying meningococcal disease may be very advanced by the time a
      rash appears. This may initially be blanching, macular, or maculopapular.
      Children without a rash or with a blanching rash can still have meningo-
      coccal disease. The classic rapidly evolving petechial or purpuric rash may
      be a very late sign and can carry a poor prognosis.
      Urgent treatment and experienced help are essential. CT scanning of the
      brain should be undertaken if there is impaired conscious level or focal
      neurological signs or signs of i ICP. CT scans must not delay treatment.
      LP has no immediate role in the ED care of the critically ill child and can
      be fatal. LP is contraindicated if there is extensive purpura, shock, impaired
      consciousness, coagulopathy, local infection or i ICP on CT or clinically.
      Give antibiotics (IV ceftriaxone or cefotaxime) immediately to:
      • All children with a fever and petechial/purpuric rash.
      • Children in shock with or without a rash.
      • Children with clinical meningitis, but LP contraindicated.
      Take any haemorrhagic rash in a febrile child very seriously. Although
      many children with fever and petechiae have viral illnesses, there is no
      room for complacency. Ensure that all have their vital signs measured, and
      are carefully checked for signs of meningitis or septicaemia.
                                                        MENINGOCOCCAL DISEASE                  667

Airway and ventilation
Intubate and ventilate:
• If impaired conscious level or i ICP clinically.
• Prior to CT scanning if critically ill.
• If ﬂuid resuscitation requirement is >40mL/kg.
Seek expert help for rapid sequence induction/intubation (RSI)—
haemodynamic collapse is common. Consider using IV ketamine for
induction if experienced in its use.
Fluid resuscitation
Vast quantities of IV ﬂuids are required in meningococcal septicaemia—
often up to 100mL/kg. Many UK authorities recommend 4.5% human
albumin solution (HAS) for ﬂuid resuscitation, but give crystalloid (0.9%
saline) if HAS is not immediately available.
Inotropes
• Dopamine or dobutamine at 10–20mcg/kg/min. Make up 3× weight (kg)
  mg in 50mL 5% glucose and run at 10mL/hr = 10mcg/kg/min.
• These dilute solutions can be used via a peripheral vein.
• Start adrenaline via a central line only (seek expert help) at 0.1mcg/kg/min.
  Make up 300mcg/kg in 50mL of saline at 1mL/hour = 0.1mcg/kg/min.
Hypoglycaemia (glucose <3mmol/L)
5mL/kg 10% glucose bolus IV and then glucose infusion at 80% of
maintenance requirements over 24 hrs.
Correction of metabolic acidosis (pH <7.2)
1mmol/kg NaHCO3 IV = 1mL/kg 8.4% NaHCO3 over 20min or 2mL/kg
4.2% NaHCO3 in neonates.
If K+ <3.5mmol\L
Give 0.25mmol/kg KCl diluted in saline or glucose over 30min IV with
ECG monitoring. Caution if anuric.
If total calcium <2mmol/L or ionized Ca2+ <1.0mmol/L
Give 0.1mL/kg 10% calcium chloride (0.7mmol/mL) over 30min IV (max
10mL) or 0.3mL/kg 10% calcium gluconate (0.22mmol/mL) over 30min
(max 20mL).
If Mg2+ <0.75 mmmol/L
Give 0.2mL/kg of 50% MgSO4 over 30min IV (max 10mL).

See: Meningitis Research Foundation (www.meningitis.org) and ‘NICE Guidance on Bacterial
  meningitis and meningococcal septicaemia’. Available at: http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/
  live/13027/49341/49341.pdf
                                                                                            RECOGNITION                                                                                            Bacterial meningitis
                                                                                                                                                                                                   algorithm
                                May present with predominant SEPTICAEMIA (with shock), MENINGITIS (with raised ICP) or both. Purpuric/petechial non-blanching rash is typical.
                                                                Some may have neither shock nor meningitis. Rash may be atypical or absent in some cases.                                          www.meningitis.org

Call consultant in Emergency Medicine, Paediatrics, Anaesthesia or Intensive Care                  Give IV ceftriaxone (80 mg/kg od) without delay
Initial assessment looking for shock/raised ICP                                                    Do not use ceftriaxone at the same time as calcium-containing solutions:
Do not perform Lumbar Puncture                                                                     in this situation use cefotaxime (50 mg/kg qds)

SIGNS OF SHOCK?                                                                                                    RAISED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE?
  Tachycardia                                                                                                        Reduced (GCS ≤8) or ﬂuctuating level of consciousness
  Capillary reﬁll time >2 seconds                                                                                    Relative Bradycardia and Hypertension
  Cold hands/feet; pale or blue skin                                                                                 Focal neurological signs
                                                                                                     NO
  Respiratory distress/ oxygen saturation <95% in air                                                                Abnormal posture or posturing
  Altered mental state/decreased conscious level                                                                     Seizures
                                                                                                                                                                                                        YES
  Decreased urine output (<1ml/kg/hr)                                                                                Unequal, dilated or poorly responsive pupils
  Hypotension (late sign)                                                                                            Papilloedema (late sign)
  Hypoxia on arterial blood gas                                                                                      Abnormal ‘doll’s eye’ movements
  Base deﬁcit (worse than -5 mmol/l)
  Increased lactate (>2 mmol/l)                                                                                                                               YES

                                            YES                                                                                                                                             NO
                                                                                                                               Do not perform Lumbar Puncture; Nil by mouth
                           Do not perform Lumbar Puncture; nil by mouth

  ABC & High ﬂow Oxygen (minimum 10 l/min) by face mask                                                              ABC and Oxygen (minimum 10 l/min) by face mask
  Measure glucose.                                                                                                   Measure glucose.
                                                                                                                     Give Mannitol (0.25g/kg) bolus or 3% Saline (3 ml/kg) over 5 minutes
  Insert 2 large i.v. cannulae (or intraosseous); Take bloods, see
                                                                                                                     Treat shock if present
                                                                                                                                                                                            CLINICAL FEATURES OF
VOLUME RESUSCITATION                                                                                                                                                                        MENINGITIS?
  Immediate bolus of 20ml/kg of 0.9% Sodium Chloride over 5–10 minutes and reassess                                Call anaesthetist and contact PICU
  immediately                                                                                                        Intubate and ventilate to control PaCO2 (4–4.5 kPa)
  If shock persists immediately give second bolus of 20ml/kg of 0.9% Sodium Chloride                                 Urinary catheter and monitor output, NG tube
  or of 4.5% human Albumin over 5–10 minutes and reassess immediately
  Observe closely for response/deterioration
  Consider urinary catheter to monitor output

                                                                                                                                                                                                   NO
                                                                                                                               NEUROINTENSIVE CARE
                                                                                                                                   30˚ head elevation, midline position
                             After 40ml/kg ﬂuid resuscitation                                         NO                           Avoid internal jugular lines
                             STILL SIGNS OF SHOCK?                                            Repeated review                      Repeat Mannitol or 3% Saline if indicated
                                                 YES                                                                               Sedate (muscle relax for transport)
                                                                                                                                   Cautious ﬂuid resuscitation (but correct coexisting shock)
      WILL REQUIRE URGENT ELECTIVE INTUBATION AND VENTILATION                                                                      Monitor pupillary size and reaction
      Call anaesthetist and contact PICU                                                                                           Avoid hyperthermia
       Immediate bolus of 20ml/kg of 0.9% Sodium Chloride or 4.5% Human Albumin over                                               Once patient is stabilised, consider CT scan to detect other intracranial pathology if   Close monitoring for signs of
       5–10 minutes and reassess immediately; Continue boluses if necessary with repeated                                          GCS ≤8, ﬂuctuating conscious level or focal neurological signs                             Raised ICP
       clinical and laboratory assessments including blood gas measurements.                                                                                                                                                  Shock
        Start peripheral inotropes (Dopamine); if IO access start Adrenaline                                                                                                                                                Perform LP if no contraindication
        ET Tube (Cuffed if possible) and CXR                                                                                                                                                                                DO NOT DELAY ANTIBIOTICS
        Anticipate pulmonary oedema (ensure PEEP)                                                                              Do not restrict ﬂuids unless there is evidence of:
        Central venous access                                                                                                   Raised intracranial pressure, or
        Urinary catheter to monitor output, Nasogastric tube                                                                    Increased antidiuretic hormone secretion
        Start Adrenaline infusion (central) if continuing need for Volume resuscitation and
        Inotropes
        For warm shock (warm peripheries, bounding pulses and low diastolic pressure) give
        Noradrenaline (central) or Dopamine (peripheral)                                                                       STEPWISE TREATMENT OF SEIZURES
        If ﬂuid and inotrope resistant shock discuss with paediatric intensivist.                                                 i.v. Lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) or Midazolam (0.1 mg/kg) bolus
                                                                                                                                  Consider Paraldehyde (0.4 ml/kg PR)
                                                                                                                                  Phenytoin (18mg/kg over 30 min i.v. with ECG monitoring)
      Anticipate, monitor and correct:                                                                                         If persistent seizures:
        Hypoglycaemia                                                                                                             Thiopental (thiopentone) 4mg/kg in intubated patients (beware of hypotension)
        Acidosis                                                                                                                  Midazolam/Thiopental infusion                                                             Repeated Review
        Hypokalaemia                                                                                                            Perform delayed LP when stable and no contraindications                                     Children with MD can
        Hypocalcaemia                                                                                                                                                                                                       deteriorate rapidly.
        Hypomagnesaemia                                                                                                                                                                                                     Deterioration detected?
        Anaemia
        Coagulopathy (Fresh Frozen Plasma 10ml/kg)                                                                             GO TO BACTERIAL MENINGITIS ALGORITHM

                                                                            Transfer to Intensive Care by Paediatric Intensive Care Retrieval Team

                                                                                                            Notify public health

Fig. 15.10 Management of meningococcal disease in children and young people. Reproduced with kind permission from the Meningitis Research Foundation
www.meningitis.org
Take blood for glucose, FBC, coagulation screen, U&E, Ca2+, Mg2+, PO43 –, blood cultures, ABG, lactate, cross-match, and PCR for N. meningitidis.
670    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      How to perform a lumbar puncture
      • Take senior advice before performing a LP.
      • Conﬁrm that there is no contra-indication to LP (eg prolonged
        or focal seizure, focal neurological signs, purpuric rash, GCS<13,
        pupillary dilatation, impaired oculocephalic reﬂexes, abnormal posture,
        hypertension, bradycardia, coagulopathy, papillodema).
      • Prepare parents, set up equipment, and enlist help from an experienced
        nurse.
      • Position the child on their side, curled up into a ball (Fig. 15.11).
      • Mark the skin with a pen in the midline at level of iliac crests.
      • Scrub and don sterile gown and gloves.
      • Clean the skin with antiseptic solution and cover with sterile drapes.
      • Consider LA for the skin with 1% lidocaine solution.
      • Slowly insert the 21G lumbar puncture needle aiming towards the
        umbilicus.
      • If this causes much pain, withdraw needle and use more lidocaine LA
        (but <3mg/kg—b Analgesia in speciﬁc situations, p.280).
      • If no CSF is obtained, withdraw needle and reassess its direction, then
        try again.
      • Collect 4 drops of CSF in each of 3 bottles and send for: microscopy
        and Gram stain, culture and sensitivity; cell counts; glucose and protein.
      • If bloody tap is obtained, send the clearest sample for cell counts.

      Fig. 15.11 Positioning for a lumbar puncture.
This page intentionally left blank
672    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Skin lesions in multisystem disease
      The appearance of the skin may provide a valuable clue to an under-
      lying disease process. If suspected, refer all of the following diseases to a
      paediatrician.
      Kawasaki disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome)
      This disease, believed to be related to a viral infection, was ﬁrst reported
      in Japan in 1967 and has now spread worldwide. Most cases affect chil-
      dren <5 years. Extensive skin and mucosal changes occur, including an
      erythematous rash, which may affect palms and soles and desquamate.
      Conjunctivitis, uveitis, ﬁssured lips, and a strawberry tongue may be seen.
      Other features: fever, acute cervical lymphadenopathy, arthritis, and
      diarrhoea. Coronary artery aneurysm (and subsequent thrombosis) is a
      signiﬁcant complication.
      If Kawasaki disease is suspected check FBC, erythrocyte sedimentation
      rate (ESR), and viral titres, and refer to a paediatrician.
      Dermatitis herpetiformis
      This is the skin manifestation of coeliac disease. Vesicles and papules occur
      over the knees, elbows and buttocks. The lesions are very itchy and produce
      much scratching. Dapsone is effective treatment: refer to a paediatrician.
      Erythema multiforme
      Target lesions often with pale blistered centres are symmetrically distributed,
      particularly over the extensor surfaces of the limbs, sometimes including the
      hands and feet. The skin lesions combined with fever, systemic illness, oral
      and genital ulceration comprise the Stevens–Johnson syndrome.
      Causes include infection (herpes, mycoplasma, tuberculosis TB) and drugs
      (sulphonamides, barbiturates).
      Erythema nodosum
      Painful red skin nodules or plaques on the anterior surfaces of both shins
      with associated fever, lethargy and arthralgia. It may be due to strepto-
      coccal infection, TB, sulphonamides, ulcerative colitis, or sarcoid.
      Erythema marginatum
      A transient erythematous rash with raised edges occurs in 20% of cases
      of rheumatic fever (b p.496). Rheumatic fever is an autoimmune disease
      which follows infection with group A streptococci. Once common, it is
      now unusual in the UK.
      Diagnose using the revised Duckett–Jones criteria (2 or more major; or
      1 major and 2 minor, plus evidence of preceding streptococcal infection
      eg throat swab, i ASO titre):
      Major criteria Erythema marginatum, carditis, polyarthritis, Sydenham’s
      chorea, subcutaneous nodules.
      Minor criteria Fever, arthralgia, i ESR, i WBC, previous rheumatic fever,
      prolonged PR interval.
                                  SKIN LESIONS IN MULTISYSTEM DISEASE                    673

Erythema chronicum migrans (see b Infestations, p.230)
The characteristic skin rash of Lyme disease begins as a red papule, which
spreads to produce erythematous lesions with pale centres and bright
edges. Lyme disease is a multisystem disorder resulting from tick-borne
infection. It initially manifests with one or more of a variety of symptoms,
including fever, headache, malaise, arthralgia, myalgia. The rash is present in
most cases. The diagnosis can be elusive, but consider it if there has been
any history of travel to an affected area.
Identifying skin lesions (Table 15.4)
Description
• Impalpable coloured lesion <1cm diameter = macule.
• Impalpable coloured lesion >1cm diameter = patch.
• Palpable lump <0.5cm diameter = papule.
• Palpable lump >0.5cm diameter = nodule.
• Palpable ﬂuid-ﬁlled lesion <0.5cm diameter = vesicle.
• Palpable ﬂuid-ﬁlled lesion >0.5cm diameter = bulla

 Table 15.4 Skin lesions and possible causes
 Feature        Causes
 Peeling skin   Toxic epidermal necrolysis (‘scalded skin syndrome’), Kawasaki
                disease.
                Streptococcal infection
 Blistering     Staphylococcus (impetigo and toxic epidermal necrolysis), scabies,
 lesions        chickenpox, herpes zoster, herpes simplex, Stevens–Johnson,
                pompholyx, coxsackie A16 (hand, foot and mouth disease),
                dermatitis herpetiformis, epidermolysis bullosa, drugs
 Lesions on     Coxsackie A16, Kawasaki disease, erythema multiforme, scables,
 palms and      pompholyx
 soles
 Pruritis       Eczema, urticaria, psoriasis, chickenpox, scabies, lice, insect bites,
                dermatitis herpetiformis
674    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric ENT problems
      Background
      Due to frequent infections and large concentrations of active lymphoid
      tissue, certain ear, nose, and throat (ENT) problems are very common
      in paediatric practice. For example, acute suppurative otitis media
      (b Earache, p.550) has an incidence of 20% amongst pre-school children;
      secretory otitis media (‘glue ear’) has a prevalence of 5% amongst all
      children. Rhinorrhoea from coryza and rhinitis is even more common.
      Approach
      Although many ENT diseases are usually considered as primary care
      problems, children often present to the ED suffering from them. It is
      obviously important to examine the ears and throat of any child presenting
      with a fever. Remember, however, that the ill, septic child with large red
      tonsils may also have a signiﬁcant septic focus elsewhere (eg meningitis or
      pneumonia).
      Examination
      Examination of the ears and throat is generally disliked by children and as
      a result, can prove to be rather a struggle. It is therefore sensible to leave
      this part of the full examination of a child until last. Parental help can be
      invaluable in allowing examination of the slightly uncooperative toddler or
      younger child. Sit the child on a parent’s lap for examination of the ears
      and throat, as shown in Fig. 15.12.
      The difﬁcult examination
      Despite various manoeuvres, it can be very difﬁcult to adequately
      visualize the throat of a child who adamantly refuses to open their mouth.
      A useful trick is to draw the face of a ‘Smiley Man’ on the end of a wooden
      spatula. The child may then consent to the ‘Smiley Man’ having a look at
      their throat (preferably with the ink side up!).
      Presentation and treatment
      The presentation, diagnosis and treatment of speciﬁc ENT diseases in
      both children and adults are described in Chapter 12.
      • b Ear, nose, and throat foreign bodies, p.546.
      • b Earache, p.550.
      • b Epistaxis, p.552.
      • b Nasal fracture, p.553.
      • b Sore throat, p.554.
                                         PAEDIATRIC ENT PROBLEMS    675

Examining a child’s ear In an infant pull the pinna back and down
(rather than up) for the best view.

Fig. 15.12 Examining a child’s throat.
676    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Stridor: upper respiratory infections
      The upper airway is a tube which may be blocked by: distortion (eg tongue
      falling back in coma), extrinsic compression (eg haematoma), swelling of
      its wall (eg burns, croup, epiglottitis, diphtheria), or FB within.
      Signs of upper airway obstruction Stridor, marked dyspnoea, drowsiness,
      subcostal/suprasternal recession, drooling of saliva, difﬁculty speaking, and
      cyanosis. Any of these warn of impending obstruction.
      Stridor is a high pitched inspiratory noise. It occurs in croup, acute
      epiglottitis, inhaled FB, laryngeal trauma, laryngomalacia (‘congenital
      laryngeal stridor’), angioneurotic oedema. See Table 15.5.
      Acute croup (laryngotracheobronchitis)
      Viral in origin (para-inﬂuenza virus in >80%). Common between 6 months,
      and 5 years of age. Spring and autumn epidemics occur. Illness lasts 83–5
      days. Coryzal symptoms usually precede harsh stridor, a barking cough
      (‘seal’s bark’) with hoarseness i over several days. Temperature (T)* is only
      mildly i. Leave the child in a comfortable position preferably in the arms
      of the parent, who can hold an O2 mask near the child. Look for signs of
      signiﬁcant airway obstruction, but do not examine the pharynx as this may
      precipitate laryngospasm or obstruction. If any of these signs are present,
      or if SpO2 <92% in air refer urgently—intubation may be required. Use the
      modiﬁed Westley croup score by adding individual values as follows:
      • Stridor: none = 0, only when upset or agitated = 1, at rest = 2.
      • Retractions: mild = 1, moderate = 2, severe = 3.
      • Air entry: normal = 0, mild decrease = 1, marked decrease = 2.
      • SpO2 <92% on air: none = 0, with agitation = 4, at rest = 5.
      • Level of consciousness: normal = 0, altered conscious level = 5.
      Children with moderate (score 3–5) or severe croup (score 6–11) and
      impending respiratory failure (score >11) require admission to hospital.
      Give oral dexamethasone 0.15mg/kg or nebulized budesonide (1–2mg in
      5mL 0.9% saline) if vomiting or severe respiratory distress and refer to
      the paediatric team. If severe (score >5), consider nebulized adrenaline
      driven by O2 at 8L/min (0.5mL/kg of 1:1000, max 5mL; repeat as required).
      Refer severe cases to PICU (<1% of croup is severe). Many children with
      mild croup (score 0–2) can be safely discharged from the ED after a brief
      period of observation. This decision should be taken by an experienced
      emergency physician or paediatrician. Discharge in the evening may be
      inadvisable, since croup can worsen overnight.
      Diphtheria
      Although rare in the UK, the exotoxin of Corynebacterium diphtheriae
      may produce serious organ damage (especially myocarditis) and upper
      respiratory tract obstruction. The non-immunized child may present
      with pyrexia, sore throat, and dysphagia due to an adherent pharyngeal
      exudate. Cervical lymphadenopathy causes a ‘bull neck’ appearance.
      (Note that infectious mononucleosis may present similarly—b p.241).
      Treat with O2, obtain ECG and venous access, send blood for FBC, blood
      culture, and obtain a throat swab. Refer for antitoxin (20,000U IM after a
      test dose) and IV erythromycin.
                             STRIDOR: UPPER RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS                677

Acute epiglottitis
Increasingly uncommon, due to widespread Hib vaccination. Rapidly
progressive airway obstruction may result. Children aged 2–7 years are
most usually involved, although it does occur in older children and adults.
Unlike croup, stridor is usually soft and may even be absent. Onset is
typically acute. The child is systemically unwell with pyrexia >38.5*C,
but little or no cough. In severe cases, the child may be ominously quiet,
unable to speak, sitting upright drooling saliva in a ‘snifﬁng position’.
Management Do not attempt to visualize the throat as this may precipitate
total airway obstruction. Let the child adopt the most comfortable
position, give humidiﬁed O2 and call urgently for anaesthetic, ICU and
ENT help. Nebulized adrenaline (0.5mL/kg of 1:1000, max 5mL) may ‘buy
time’. Defer doing blood tests (FBC, blood cultures) and treatment with
IV cefotaxime until an anaesthetist has assessed the child. Lateral neck
X-rays are unnecessary and potentially hazardous. Intubation, if required,
may be very difﬁcult to perform. A safe approach is for an experienced
anaesthetist to use a gaseous induction in the presence of a surgeon who
is prepared for a surgical airway. Airway swelling may require a smaller
than expected diameter (and thus uncut) ET tube. Let the anaesthetist
know the number of adrenaline nebulizers given, as halothane induction
could precipitate arrhythmias. If visualization of the tracheal oriﬁce is
difﬁcult at laryngoscopy due to oedema, ask an assistant to squeeze the
chest and look for an air bubble emerging from the trachea.
Loss of the airway—if this happens, summon help and attempt to
ventilate with O2 using bag and mask. If ventilation proves impossible,
obtain a surgical airway (needle cricothyroidotomy if <12 years, surgical
cricothyroidotomy if ≥12 years)—see b p.326.
Bacterial tracheitis
May be due to Staph. aureus, Strep., or H. inﬂuenzae. The presentation
of ‘croup’, plus moderate/severe pyrexia, and production of copious
secretions suggests the diagnosis. If suspected, refer and treat as for acute
epiglottitis (intubation is often required). Bacterial tracheitis can cause
rapid onset of septic shock.

 Table 15.5 Clinical presentations of upper airway obstruction
           Croup                Epiglottitis     Bacterial           Foreign
                                                 tracheitis          body
 Age       1–2 years            2–6 years        Throughout          Throughout
                                                 childhood           childhood
 Onset     1–2 days             <24hr            <24hr               <24hr
 History   Coryza, barking      Sore throat,     Rattling cough,
           cough                dysphagia        sore throat
 Signs     T°<38.5 non-toxic,   T°>38.5          T°>38.5 toxic,      Afebrile,
           harsh stridor,       toxic, upright   mucopurulent        non-toxic
           hoarseness           position         secretions, soft/
                                                 absent stridor
678    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Severe acute asthma in children
      Assess conscious level, degree of breathlessness, degree of agitation, use
      of accessory muscles, amount of wheezing, pulse rate and respiratory
      rate. Attempt to measure peak ﬂow if age >5 years (See Fig. 15.13 for
      normal peak ﬂow).
      Follow the 2011 British Thoracic Society/Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
      Network (BTS/SIGN) Guidelines based on age and severity (http://www.
      sign.ac.uk/pdf/sign101.pdf). Investigations, including blood gas estimations,
      rarely alter immediate management.
      Cautions Children with severe asthma attacks may not appear distressed.
      Wheeze and respiratory rate correlate poorly with severity of airway
      obstruction. Increasing tachycardia denotes worsening asthma, a fall in
      heart rate in life-threatening asthma is pre-terminal.
      Assessment in the very young (<2 years) may be difﬁcult—get expert
      help.
      Normal peak expiratory ﬂow in children aged 5–18 years.

                                                       600                             2SD
                                                                      Boys and girls

                   Peak expiratory flow (litres/min)
                                                       500
                                                                                        Mean

                                                       400
                                                                                        –2SD

                                                       300

                                                       200

                                                       100
                                                             110 120 130 140 150 160 170
                                                                       Height (cm)
      Fig. 15.13
                                 SEVERE ACUTE ASTHMA IN CHILDREN                679

Management of acute asthma in children aged >2 years
(Figs 15.14 and 15.15)
• Summon senior ED/PICU/paediatric help if asthma is severe.
• Provide high ﬂow O2 via face mask (or nasal cannulae).
• Give an inhaled B-agonist. In mild or moderate asthma use a metered
  dose inhaler with a spacer, and 2–4 puffs of 100mcg salbutamol every
  10–20min.
• In severe or life threatening asthma use an O2-powered nebulizer with
  salbutamol 2.5–5mg or terbutaline 5–10mg.
• Give oral prednisolone (20mg for children aged 2–5 years; 30–40mg if
  aged >5 years). If already taking maintenance steroids, give 2mg/kg (max
  60mg). In children who vomit, repeat the dose of prednisolone and
  consider IV hydrocortisone 4mg/kg.
• Add ipratropium bromide 0.25mg every 20–30 min if there is poor initial
  response to nebulized B-agonist.
• Consider salbutamol (15mcg/kg) given IV over 10min in severe cases
  with a poor response to initial nebulized salbutamol and ipratropium
  bromide. Refer to PICU urgently and check K+ levels.
• Aminophylline is not recommended in children with mild to moderate
  asthma. In severe or life-threatening asthma unresponsive to maximal
  doses of bronchodilators and systemic steroids, take specialist advice
  and consider IV aminophylline (5mg/kg over 20min; maintenance IV
  infusion at 1mg/kg/hr; omit loading dose if already receiving oral theo-
  phyllines).
• Consider an IVI of magnesium sulphate 40mg/kg over 20min, but
  evidence of beneﬁt is limited.
• Do not give ‘routine’ antibiotics.
Notes If possible, repeat and record peak ﬂow 15–30min after starting
treatment. If the patient is not improving, give further nebulized B-agonist.
Pulse oximetry is helpful in assessing response to treatment. An SpO2
≤92% in air after initial bronchodilator therapy usually indicates the need
for more intensive in-patient care usually in PICU. CXR is indicated for
severe dyspnoea, focal chest signs, or signs of severe infection.
Consider need for anaesthesia/intubation/IPPV and PICU transfer
• Deteriorating peak ﬂow or worsening or persistent hypoxia or normal/
  increased pCO2 levels on ABG.
• Exhaustion, feeble respiratory effort, confusion, or drowsiness.
• Coma or respiratory arrest.
Management of acute asthma in children aged <2 years
Assessing acute asthma in early childhood is difﬁcult: get specialist help
(see www.sign.ac.uk). Intermittent wheezing attacks are usually due to viral
infection. Differential diagnosis includes: aspiration and other pneumonias,
bronchiolitis, tracheomalacia, complications of underlying conditions (eg
congenital abnormalities, cystic ﬁbrosis). If there is no response to inhaled
bronchodilators, review the diagnosis:
• Use a metered dose inhaler with spacer to give B-agonist therapy.
• Consider systemic steroids early in the management of moderate to
   severe asthma in infants (10mg of soluble prednisolone).
• Consider adding inhaled ipratropium bromide (0.25mg) to inhaled
   B-agonists for more severe symptoms.
680    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

                                                Age 2–5 years
                                        ASSESS ASTHMA SEVERITY

       Moderate asthma                   Severe asthma                       Life threatening asthma
        SpO2 ≥92%                          SpO2 <92%                       SpO2 <92% plus any of:
        No clinical features of            Too breathless to talk or eat    Silent chest
         severe asthma                      Heart rate >140/min              Poor respiratory effort
                                            Respiratory rate >40/min         Agitation
       NB: If a patient has signs and
                                            Use of accessory neck            Altered consciousness
       symptoms across categories,
                                             muscles                          Cyanosis
       always treat according to
       their most severe features

                                             Oxygen via face mask/nasal prongs to achieve SpO2 94–98%

       β2 agonist 2–10 puffs via         β2 agonist 10 puffs via            Nebulized β2 agonist:
        spacer ± facemask [given           spacer ± facemask or                salbutamol 2.5 mg or
        one at a time single puffs,        nebulized salbutamol                terbutaline 5 mg plus
        tidal breathing and inhaled        2.5 mg or terbutaline 5 mg          ipratropium bromide
        separately]                       Soluble prednisolone 20 mg          0.25 mg nebulized
       Increase β2 agonist dose           or IV hydrocortisone               Oral prednisolone 20 mg or
        by 2 puffs every 2 minutes         4 mg/kg                             IV hydrocortisone 4mg/kg
        up to 10 puffs according to       Repeat β2 agonist up to             if vomiting
        response                           every 20–30 minutes               Discuss with senior clinician,
       Consider soluble oral              according to response             PICU team or paediatrician
        prednisolone 20 mg                If poor response add
                                           0.25 mg nebulized                    Repeat bronchodilators
          Reassess within 1 hour           ipratropium bromide                   every 20–30 minutes

                                  ASSESS RESPONSE TO TREATMENT
                 Record respiratory rate, heart rate and oxygen saturation every 1–4 hours

      RESPONDING                                                 NOT RESPONDING
       Continue bronchodilators 1–4 hours prn                    Arrange HDU/PICU transfer
       Discharge when stable on 4 hourly                        Consider:
        treatment
                                                                  Chest X-ray and blood gases
       Continue oral prednisolone for up to 3 days
                                                                  IV salbutamol 15 mcg/kg bolus over
      At discharge                                                 10 minutes followed by continuous
                                                                   infusion 1–5 mcg/kg/min (dilute to
         Ensure stable on 4 hourly inhaled treatment
                                                                   200 mcg/ml)
         Review the need for regular treatment and the use
                                                                  IV aminophylline 5 mg/kg loading
          of inhaled steroids
                                                                   dose over 20 minutes (omit in those
         Review inhaler technique
                                                                   receiving oral theophyllines)
         Provide a written asthma action plan for treating
                                                                   followed by continuous infusion
          future attacks
                                                                   1 mg/kg/hour
         Arrange follow up according to local policy

      Fig. 15.14 Management of acute asthma in 2–5-year-olds.
      See: www.brit-thoracic.org.uk and www.sign.ac.uk
                                             SEVERE ACUTE ASTHMA IN CHILDREN                          681

                                         Age >5 years
                                  ASSESS ASTHMA SEVERITY

 Moderate asthma                   Severe asthma                    Life threatening asthma
  SpO2 ≥92%                        SpO2 <92%                      SpO2 <92% plus any of:
  PEF >50% best or predicted       PEF 33–50% best or              PEF <33% best or predicted
  No clinical features of           predicted                       Silent chest
   severe asthma                    Heart rate >125/min             Poor respiratory effort
                                    Respiratory rate >30/min        Altered consciousness
 NB: If a patient has signs and
                                    Use of accessory neck           Cyanosis
 symptoms across categories,
                                     muscles
 always treat according to
 their most severe features

                                       Oxygen via face mask/nasal prongs to achieve SpO2 94–98%

  β2 agonist 2–10 puffs via        β2 agonist 10 puffs via         Nebulized β2 agonist:
   spacer                            spacer or nebulized              salbutamol 5 mg or
  Increase β2 agonist dose          salbutamol 2.5–5 mg              terbutaline 10 mg plus
   by 2 puffs every 2 minutes        or terbutaline 5–10 mg           ipratropium bromide
   up to 10 puffs according to      Oral prednisolone 30–40 mg       0.25 mg nebulized
   response                          or IV hydrocortisone            Oral prednisolone 30–40 mg
  Oral prednisolone                 4 mg/kg if vomiting              or IV hydrocortisone
   30–40 mg                         If poor response nebulized       4mg/kg if vomiting
                                     ipratropium bromide 0.25 mg    Discuss with senior clinician,
                                    Repeat β2 agonist and          PICU team or paediatrician
                                     ipratropium up to every
                                     20–30 minutes according to        Repeat bronchodilators
    Reassess within 1 hour           response                           every 20–30 minutes

                            ASSESS RESPONSE TO TREATMENT
      Record respiratory rate, heart rate, oxygen saturation and PEF/FEV every 1–4 hours

RESPONDING                                              NOT RESPONDING
   Continue bronchodilators 1–4 hours prn               Continue 20–30 minute nebulizers and
   Discharge when stable on 4 hourly                     arrange HDU/PICU transfer
    treatment                                            Consider: Chest X-ray and blood gases
   Continue oral prednisolone 30–40 mg                  Consider risks and benefits of:
    for up to 3 days                                     Bolus IV salbutamol 15 mcg/kg if not
                                                          already given
At discharge
                                                         Continuous IV salbutamol infusion
   Ensure stable on 4 hourly inhaled treatment            1–5 mcg/kg/min (200 mcg/ml solution)
   Review the need for regular treatment and the use    IV aminophylline 5 mg/kg loading
    of inhaled steroids                                   dose over 20 minutes (omit in those
   Review inhaler technique                              receiving oral theophyllines) followed by
   Provide a written asthma action plan for treating     continuous infusion 1 mg/kg/hour
    future attacks                                       Bolus IV infusion of magnesium sulphate
   Arrange follow up according to local policy           40 mg/kg (max 2 g) over 20 minutes

Fig. 15.15 Management of acute asthma in children aged less than 2 years.
See: www.brit-thoracic.org.uk and www.sign.ac.uk
682    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Acute bronchiolitis1
      Viral infection of the small airways results in inﬂammation, oedema, and
      excessive secretions, presenting with signs of obstructive airways disease.
      Acute bronchiolitis is common, particularly in the winter months and pre-
      dominantly involves infants (typically 3–6 months). Those at particular risk
      are the very young (aged <6 weeks), the premature (born <35 weeks)
      and those with chronic respiratory, congenital heart disease, immunode-
      ﬁciency, or neurological problems. Parental smoking increases the risk of
      bronchiolitis. Breast feeding for more than two months appears to have a
      protective effect. Most infants recover completely within 2 weeks.
      Agents responsible
      75% are caused by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Other causes include
      inﬂuenza, para-inﬂuenza, adeno-, and enteroviruses.
      Presentation
      Coryza, rhinorrhoea, and mild fever progress to respiratory distress
      with dyspnoea, dry cough, feeding difﬁculties, and wheeze (variable).
      Some children may present with apnoea. Inspection may reveal cyanosis,
      dehydration, tachypnoea (>50/min), nasal ﬂaring, grunting, subcostal and
      intercostal recession. The chest is usually visibly hyperinﬂated in bronchi-
      olitis. There may be tachycardia and prolonged expiration (±wheeze) with
      ﬁne end-inspiratory crepitations.
      Complications
      Feeding difﬁculties, apnoeic spells, and respiratory failure (hence, adopt
      a low threshold for admission). Secondary bacterial infection can occur,
      but is uncommon. Long-term airway damage may occasionally occur
      (obliterative bronchiolitis).
      Investigations
      • Apply a pulse oximeter, and check the pulse and CRT.
      • Do not do routine blood tests unless the infant is febrile or an
        alternative diagnosis, such as pneumonia or sepsis is more likely.
      • Consider CXR and ABG/capillary gas only for those with progressive,
        atypical or severe illness. Do not do CXR routinely.
      • Fluorescent antibody tests on nasopharyngeal aspirate to demonstrate
        the presence of RSV are recommended; these help with cohorting and
        isolation arrangements on the wards (see opposite), particularly during
        the annual epidemic season in winter.
      • Assess feeding difﬁculties by offering a bottle feed.
      CXR shows hyperinﬂation with downward displacement of the diaphragm
      due to small airway obstruction and gas trapping. There may also be
      collapse or consolidation (usually upper lobe) or perihilar inﬁltrates hard
      to distinguish from pneumonia.
      Differential diagnoses for bronchiolitis include congenital heart disease,
      asthma, pneumonia, cystic ﬁbrosis, inhaled foreign body and septicaemia.
                                                                ACUTE BRONCHIOLITIS               683

Treatment
Refer all infants with respiratory distress, feeding difﬁculties (<50% usual
ﬂuid intake in previous 24 hr), SpO2 <94% on air, apnoeic episodes, or
dehydration. Emergency treatment is largely supportive, comprising
humidiﬁed O2 (aiming to keep SpO2 >92%), NG or IV ﬂuids and some-
times CPAP or IPPV. Dehydration may be severe enough to warrant an
IV ﬂuid bolus of 20mL/kg. Treatment with inhaled bronchodilators may
achieve short-term (30–60min) clinical improvement in a minority, but
there is no convincing evidence of efﬁcacy. Nasal suction may help those
in respiratory distress. Ribavirin is of no value and should not be used.
Do not give antibiotics for bronchiolitis, but consider for severe illness
suggestive of co-existing pneumonia or septicaemia. There is no beneﬁt
from using ipratropium, oral or inhaled steroids, or nebulized adrenaline.
Do not use these therapies in acute bronchiolitis.
PICU referral and ventilatory support is indicated for those with recurrent
apnoea, persistent acidosis pH <7.25, infants with d conscious level, poor
chest wall movement, and low SaO2 (<92%) despite FiO2 >60%, and
those with hypercapnoea.
Cross infection is a serious problem during epidemics. Ensure all persons
entering a cubicle containing a child with bronchiolitis clean their hands
before and after seeing the patient, and use gloves and plastic aprons.
Prevention
Palivizumab is a humanized monoclonal RSV antibody, which is used as a
prophylactic agent to reduce the severity of RSV disease in at risk infants.
It can be considered for use on a case-by-case basis in infants who:
• Were born prematurely (<35 weeks gestation).
• Have acyanotic congenital heart disease.
• Have chronic lung disease.
• Have severe congenital immunodeﬁciency.
Infants should be selected for this treatment by a local lead paediatric
specialist.

1 See the SIGN Guideline on Bronchiolitis in Children. Available at: http://www.sign.ac.uk/pdf/
  sign91.pdf
684    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Whooping coughND
      Caused by Bordetella pertussis, whooping cough is a notiﬁable disease with
      an incubation period of 5–14 days (b p.220). It is common (particularly
      in the autumn) in children not immunized against it. A similar disease
      may also occur with other viral infections (Bordetella parapertussis and
      adenoviruses).
      Presentation
      Coryza is followed by increasing cough (typically worse at night, and
      tending to occur in bouts, often culminating in vomiting). Severe coughing
      bouts may result in conjunctival haemorrhages. The characteristic ‘whoop’
      is an inspiratory noise produced after a coughing bout. It is not present in
      all infants with whooping cough. The cough may persist for several weeks.
      Complications
      Illness is often prolonged. There is a risk of neurological damage and bron-
      chiectasis. Infants are at particular risk of death from apnoeic episodes.
      Investigations
      Send blood for viral titres, mycoplasma antibodies and FBC (usually
      reveals markedly i lymphocytes). CXR may be normal or show ‘shaggy’
      right heart border.
      Treatment
      Refer infants aged <6 months (risk of apnoea) and any acutely unwell child.
      Discharge others (having informed the Infectious Diseases consultant)
      with PO erythromycin (12.5mg/kg qds) and advice to avoid contact with
      other children for 5 days. Arrange GP follow-up and give PO erythromycin
      (12.5mg/kg qds) as prophylaxis to unimmunized infant siblings.
      Prevention
      Encourage immunization.
                                             TB ND AND CYSTIC FIBROSIS           685

TBND and cystic ﬁbrosis
Pulmonary TB
TB is being seen increasingly again (b p.232). It is more common in
visitors from overseas or HIV +ve children. TB may present in a variety
of ways in children: persistent cough and fever, growth retardation,
meningitis, pleural effusion, monoarticular arthritis, lymphadenopathy,
back pain, hepatosplenomegaly.
Investigation CXR.
Treatment Refer suspected cases for specialist evaluation, including
Mantoux (0.1mL intradermal tuberculin) and treatment.
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Recurrent respiratory infections in neonates and infants raise the possibility
of cystic ﬁbrosis, tracheo-oesophageal ﬁstula, cleft palate, or a defect in
immunity. Cystic ﬁbrosis is an autosomal recessive disorder affecting 1 in
2000 children. It may present neonatally with meconium ileus or later with
respiratory infections (±ﬁnger clubbing), failure to thrive, rectal prolapse
and steatorrhoea. Once diagnosed, a child will remain closely monitored
and treated by both GP and a specialist CF respiratory team. Involve this
team at an early stage if a child with cystic ﬁbrosis presents with respira-
tory infection.
686    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Pneumonia
      Pneumonia is relatively common at all ages, but the infective agents
      responsible vary (Table 15.6). Viruses are most commonly found as a
      cause in younger children. In older children, when a bacterial cause is
      found, it is most commonly Strep. pneumoniae.

      Table 15.6 Infective agents responsible for pneumonia
      Age               Common causes
      Neonates          E. coli, B-haemolytic Strep., Chlamydia trachomatis, Listeria
                        monocytogenes, CMV
       Infants and      RSV, para-inﬂuenza viruses, Strep pneumoniae, H. inﬂuenzae,
       toddlers         Mycoplasma
       Older children   Strep pneumoniae, H. inﬂuenzae, Mycoplasma

      Symptoms
      Often an URTI is followed by i fever, cough, dyspnoea, lethargy, feeding
      difﬁculties, and dehydration. Pleuritic chest pain, abdominal pain, and
      neck stiffness may occur. The presence of headache, abdominal pain,
      maculopapular rash, and joint pains suggests Mycoplasma infection.
      Signs
      The child is usually dyspnoeic, pyrexial, and unwell. Classic signs of
      consolidation (b p.114) are often absent, especially in infants and younger
      children. Look for evidence of infection elsewhere (ears, throat) and
      dehydration. If wheeze is present in a pre-school child, bacterial pneumonia
      is unlikely, although it does occur occasionally with mycobacteria in older
      children.
      Investigations
      • Take throat swabs.
      • Obtain blood for FBC, cultures, viral titres, and mycoplasma antibodies.
      • Check SpO2.
      • Obtain urine for culture.
      • CXR may demonstrate widespread bronchopneumonia or lobar
        consolidation. Cavitation suggests Staphyloccocal pneumonia or TB.
      Treatment
      If SpO2<92%, give O2. Treat dehydration with IV ﬂuids. Refer for admission
      and antibiotics. IPPV is rarely required.
      The choice of antibiotic will depend upon the likely infective agent and
      local/national protocols (see British Thoracic Society guidelines: www.
      brit-thoracic.org.uk and see Box 15.2).
      Refer to ICU those unable to maintain SpO2 >92% with 60% O2, those
      with signs of shock, increasing respiratory rate/pulse rate with respiratory
      distress and exhaustion, those with slow irregular breathing or recurrent
      apnoea.
                                                           PNEUMONIA      687

Box 15.2 Antibiotic treatment for suspected bacterial
pneumonia
Uncomplicated community acquired pneumonia
• Neonate: benzylpenicillin and gentamicin.
• Neonate and child under 6 months: cefuroxime or co-amoxiclav (or
  benzylpenicillin if lobar pneumonia or S. pneumoniae suspected).
• Child 6 months to 5 years: oral amoxicillin or oral erythromycin.
• Child 5–18 years: oral erythromycin (or oral amoxicillin if
  S. pneumoniae suspected).
Add ﬂucloxacillin if staph suspected eg in inﬂuenza or measles
Use erythromycin if atypical pathogens suspected or penicillin allergic
Severe community acquired pneumonia of unknown aetiology
• Neonate: benzylpenicillin and gentamicin.
• 1 month to 18 years: cefuroxime or co-amoxiclav (or benzylpenicillin
  if lobar pneumonia or S. pneumoniae suspected).
Use erythromycin if atypical pathogens such as mycoplasma (more
common in children over 5 years) or Chlamydia suspected or penicillin
allergic. Add ﬂucloxacillin if Staphylococcus suspected.
688    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Fits, febrile convulsions, and
      funny turns
      A careful history is crucial. Epileptic ﬁts may take many forms:
      Grand mal (tonic/clonic) Loss of consciousness and shaking of all limbs.
      Petit mal (‘absences’) Child pauses in speech or other activity and is
      unaware of episode.
      Focal ﬁt Involves 1 part of body (progression to grand mal = Jacksonian
      march).
      Myoclonic ﬁt May be violent and includes drop attacks.
      Infantile spasm (Salaam attack) May involve truncal ﬂexion and cause a fall.
      Temporal lobe epilepsy Numerous bizarre presentations.
      The ﬁtting patient
      The child who is still ﬁtting on arrival to hospital is likely to have had a
      prolonged seizure and needs urgent attention.
      • Give O2.
      • Secure the airway. If teeth are clenched, do not try to prise them
        open to insert an airway. Instead, if the airway is obstructed, try a
        nasopharyngeal airway (b p.325).
      • Give IV lorazepam (0.1mg/kg) or if venous access is unsuccessful, per
        rectum (PR) diazepam (0.5mg/kg) or buccal midazolam (0.5mg/kg).
      • Check bedside strip measurement of venous/capillary blood glucose
        (BMG) and treat hypoglycaemia with IV 0.5g/kg dextrose (5mL/kg of
        10%).
      • Treat fever >38*C with rectal paracetamol.
      • If ﬁts continue, follow the algorithm for status epilepticus (b p.690).
      After the ﬁt has ﬁnished
      Reassess Airway, Breathing, Circulation. Continue O2 and place in the
      recovery position. Check for injuries and perform regular observations.
      First ﬁt Refer for investigation of possible causes. U&E, blood glucose,
      Ca2+, Mg2+, FBC, and urinalysis will be required.
      Subsequent ﬁt If appropriate, check serum anticonvulsant level and
      arrange for GP/outpatient clinic to receive the results and adjust dose
      appropriately. Allow home patients with known epilepsy who have
      fully recovered and have no obvious cause for the ﬁt (eg meningitis,
      hypoglycaemia).
      Febrile convulsions
      These are grand mal seizures lasting <5min and secondary to pyrexia of
      febrile illness. Commonest cause of ﬁts between 6 months and 5 years,
      affecting 3% of children. Although 30% recur, only 1% go on to develop
      epilepsy in adult life. By deﬁnition, children already diagnosed as epileptic,
      do not have febrile convulsions, but ‘further ﬁts’. Treat patients who arrive
                   FITS, FEBRILE CONVULSIONS, AND FUNNY TURNS                   689

ﬁtting with O2, airway care and IV lorazepam, PR diazepam or buccal
midazolam as described opposite. Check BMG and T*. Give PR (or if
conscious, oral) paracetamol (15mg/kg). Examine thoroughly for a source
of infection (particularly meningitis) and perform an infection screen: U&E,
FBC, blood cultures, MSU, CXR and LP. Consider discharging children
aged >2 years with second or subsequent febrile convulsion, and obvious
benign and treatable cause for pyrexia, with appropriate treatment. Liaise
with GP to consider arranging for parents to administer rectal diazepam
or buccal midazolam to terminate future febrile ﬁts. Admit children aged
<2 years, those with ﬁrst febrile ﬁts, and those with serious infections or
an unknown cause of pyrexia.
Approach to the febrile child aged <3 years
Usually symptoms and signs of illness are non-speciﬁc. General aspects of
behaviour and appearance provide the best guide as to whether a serious
illness is likely. The degree of fever and response to antipyretics is not
helpful. Up to 5% of those who present with fever will have bacteraemia.
Admit any febrile child <3 years who appears unwell/ miserable.
Febrile infants (>38*C) aged <3 months are especially difﬁcult to assess
and require admission for a ‘septic screen’ (FBC, serology, blood cultures,
urine culture ±CXR, lumbar puncture (LP). Discuss with a neonatologist
the need for IV antibiotics in babies aged <28 days.
Young children aged 3 months–3 years who have a clear focus of infection
and appear well should be treated as indicated. If there is no clear focus of
infection, consider short-term admission in a paediatric facility.
Funny turns
Only a minority of reported ‘funny turns’ are epileptic ﬁts. Most require
referral and investigation. The history is crucial.
Infants Irregular and varying depth of respiration during sleep is normal,
but can cause parental alarm. Self-limiting apnoeic or cyanotic episodes
may be due to: ﬁts, inhaled FBs, near-miss cot death, gastro-oesophageal
reﬂux and laryngeal spasm, or arrhythmias (eg SVT).
Toddlers Breath-holding attacks commonly accompany frustration. They
may cause the toddler to turn blue, lose consciousness, and even have
a brief ﬁt. Reﬂex anoxic episodes (‘pallid syncope’) are due to excess
vagal stimulation in illness or after injury. Bradycardia, pallor and loss of
consciousness is occasionally accompanied by a short ﬁt.
Older children Syncope on exertion should prompt consideration of aortic
stenosis, SVT, coarctation or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Vasovagal
episodes and hyperventilation also cause ‘collapse’. Atypical or unheralded
collapse or seizures may be a feature of inherited long QT syndrome, and
is associated with torsades de pointes. Obtain an ECG in any child who
presents with collapse or ‘ﬁrst ﬁt’.
690    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Status epilepticus
      Deﬁnition a ﬁt (or consecutive ﬁts without complete recovery between)
      lasting >30min. The duration of the seizures is often underestimated
      because the intensity of the jerking diminishes with time and small
      amplitude twitching may be easily missed.
      Status epilepticus usually involves tonic-clonic ﬁts and as in adults, is
      associated with signiﬁcant mortality (84%) and morbidity (up to 30% have
      long-term neurological damage). Prompt treatment with termination of
      the ﬁt is crucial to d these risks.
      Causes meningitis, head injury, altered drug therapy, or non-compliance in
      known epileptic child, metabolic disturbances, encephalopathy (including
      Reye’s syndrome), ‘febrile status’, poisoning.
      Treatment algorithm for the ﬁtting child1
      • Open and maintain airway and give O2.
      • Do not prise open clenched teeth—consider nasopharyngeal airway.
      • Rapidly obtain venous access and check BMG.
      • Give lorazepam 0.1mg/kg IV over 30–60sec* (if no venous access: give
        0.5mg/kg diazepam PR or buccal midazolam 0.5mg/kg).
      • Treat hypoglycaemia with 0.5g/kg dextrose (5mL/kg of 10%) IV.
      • Apply pulse oximeter and send blood for investigations (see below).
      • Check T*: if >38*C give paracetamol 15mg/kg PR.
      If seizure continuing at 10min
      • Repeat lorazepam 0.1mg/kg IV over 30–60sec* (or if vascular access still
         not obtained, give paraldehyde 0.4mL/kg PR in the same volume of olive
         oil or 0.9% saline).
      • Get senior help and call for senior ED/anaesthetic/PICU help.
      If seizure continuing after a further 10min
      • If not known to be taking phenytoin: start phenytoin infusion 18mg/kg
         IV* over 20min (monitor BP and ECG) or if already on phenytoin, give
         phenobarbital 20mg/kg IV* over 10min.
      If seizure continuing after a further 20min
      • Paralyse, intubate and ventilate using IV thiopental (induction dose 4mg/
         kg) and consider a thiopental infusion.
      • Transfer to ICU/PICU for ventilation and EEG monitoring.
      Investigations: BMG and blood glucose, U&E, Ca2+, Mg2+, PO43 – , LFTs, FBC,
      ABG/capillary gas, blood cultures, coagulation screen, CXR. If taking anti-
      convulsant(s): check serum level(s). Obtain CT scan of head if intracranial
      disease is suspected (unless clinically meningitis), in which case treat
      immediately—b Meningococcal disease, p.666).

      1 See APLS Manual 4th edn, 2005.
      * Intraosseous route is an alternative.
                                                           DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS                691

Diabetic ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis will usually present to the ED in a child who is known
to be diabetic, but occasionally it can be the ﬁrst presentation of DKA.
The child will present with features including altered conscious level,
polyuria, polydipsia, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Children with
DKA can die from cerebral oedema (unpredictable and has 25% mortality),
aspiration pneumonia, or hypokalaemia. All of these are avoidable with
appropriate treatment.
Be very careful not to misdiagnose the abdominal pain of DKA as a ‘surgical
abdomen’ or to dismiss the child as ‘hyperventilating’ (the i respiratory
rate is due to profound metabolic acidosis). Call senior ED and paediatric
staff when DKA is suspected.
Causes First episode of DKA in a previously well child. In a child with
known diabetes, lack of insulin, change of therapy, and intercurrent viral
illness can cause DKA. Fever suggests sepsis (fever is not part of DKA).
Treatment algorithm for the child with DKA1
• Open and maintain airway if not fully conscious and give high ﬂow O2.
• Attach cardiac monitor (look for tall T-waves) and record CRT/BP.
• Rapidly obtain venous access and check BMG (remember BMG often
  underestimates blood glucose in DKA) and estimate weight.
• Take blood for glucose, U&E, FBC, VBG (and ketones if available).
• If evidence of shock (tachycardia, prolonged CRT, hypotension), give
  10mL/kg 0.9% saline as a bolus; repeat as required up to 30mL/kg.
Conﬁrm the diagnosis of DKA
• Check history with child and parents: polyuria, polydipsia; vomiting,
  abdominal pain, drowsiness, and i respiratory rate.
• Biochemical: high glucose (>11mmol/L; acidosis (pH<7.3, bicarbonate
  <15mmol/L); glycosuria and ketonuria.
Involve senior paediatric ± PICU staff
• Assess level of dehydration (mild <3%; moderate 5% (dry mucous
  membranes/d skin turgor); severe 8% (sunken eyes, i CRT, shocked and
  needed ﬂuid bolus) and record in ED notes.
• Involve PICU if very young (<2 years), severe acidosis (pH<7.1), severe
  dehydration or d conscious level (cerebral oedema, i risk of aspiration).
Further care
• Do not start insulin until IV ﬂuids have been running for at least 1hr—
  earlier insulin therapy is associated with i cerebral oedema.
• Do not administer bicarbonate except on specialist PICU advice.
• Follow local protocols for continuing ﬂuid replacement, but remember
  that over-infusion of ﬂuid is associated with cerebral oedema.
• Aim for replacement of ﬂuids and potassium over 48hr or longer.

1 See http://www.bsped.org.uk/professional/guidelines/docs/DKAGuideline.pdf for full details.
692    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Urinary tract infection (UTI)
      UTI in children requires prompt investigation, since progressive
      renal failure and hypertension may occur insidiously. 35% have proven
      vesico-ureteric reﬂux: early treatment may help to prevent renal failure.
      UTI may present in a variable and non-speciﬁc fashion. Consider and
      exclude UTI as part of the initial approach to any ill child presenting
      to the ED.
      Presentations
      Older children typically present with lower abdominal pain, dysuria,
      frequency, offensive urine, haematuria or fever. However, dysuria and
      frequency do not always reﬂect UTI. Children <3 years old often present
      unwell with fever and irritability, but no speciﬁc signs. Infants may present
      with poor feeding, vomiting, and failure to thrive.
      Examination
      Always check the BP and feel for loin tenderness (pyelonephritis) and
      abdominal masses (polycystic kidneys).
      Investigation
      Obtain a clean catch specimen of urine for urinalysis, microscopy, culture
      and sensitivity. This can prove to be quite difﬁcult, depending upon the
      age of the child. Try one of the following approaches:
      Neonates and infants
      • Clean the perineum with sterile water, then tap with 2 ﬁngers just
        above the symphysis pubis (ideally 1hr post-feed) and catch the urine
        which is forthcoming, trying to avoid the ﬁrst few millilitres.
      • Clean the perineum as above and use a urine collection pad according
        to the manufacturer’s instructions.
      • Suprapubic aspiration is useful if the baby is seriously ill. Clean the
        skin with antiseptic solution, then using sterile gloves and an aseptic
        technique, insert a 21G needle in the midline 2.5cm above the pubic
        crest and aspirate urine.
      Toddlers and older children
      • Co-operation will enable an MSU to be obtained (in the male, gently
        retract the foreskin (if possible) and clean the glans ﬁrst; in the female,
        separate the labia and clean the perineum front to back, ﬁrst).
      • If the child is uncooperative, try a urine collection pad or bag.
      Dipstick urinalysis at the bedside will reveal the presence of blood, protein,
      sugar, bilirubin, ketones or nitrite. A positive nitrite test is accepted as
      good evidence of UTI. Urine pH is not usually helpful, for although pH
      <4.6 or >8.0 may reﬂect infection, it may also be due to various acid-base
      disorders. Urinalysis may be normal, despite bacteriuria. Urine microscopy
      allows a search for pyuria and bacteriuria (highly suggestive of UTI) and an
      accurate assessment of other constituents (see Table 15.7). Perform FBC,
      U&E, blood glucose, and blood cultures if septicaemic, loin pain or i T°.
                                             URINARY TRACT INFECTION (UTI)                    693

Treatment
• Children with suspected pyelonephritis or who appear toxic: resuscitate
  as necessary with IV ﬂuids (b p.663) and refer for admission and
  IV antibiotics (eg cefotaxime). Infection with beta lactamase producing
  E. coli is said to be increasing, and some recommend at least one dose
  of gentamicin, pending sensitivities. Give antibiotics for 10 days.
• Symptomatic children with abnormal urinalysis (proteinuria or haematuria):
  start a 3-day course of antibiotics PO (trimethoprim or cefalexin—
  dose according to age, refer to BNFC). Encourage plenty of oral ﬂuids
  and complete voiding of urine. Offer advice to the child and parents
  (eg avoid tight underwear, use toilet paper wiping from front to back).
• Organize paediatric follow-up to receive results of MSU and to arrange
  subsequent investigations: this may include U&E, blood glucose, ultra-
  sound scan (USS) and a variety of other tests (eg isotope renography
  and micturating cysto-urethrography), according to local policy.
• Recurrent UTIs with anogenital signs may be due to sexual abuse.

Table 15.7 Urine microscopy ﬁndings and their signiﬁcance
Red cells      Normally <3/mm3
White cells Normally <3/mm3
Epithelial     Present normally: shed from urinary epithelium
cells
 Bacteria      Always abnormal, reﬂecting infection or specimen contamination
 or fungi
 Casts         Hyaline casts—comprise Tamm–Horsfall protein: may be normal,
               but i in fever, exercise, heart failure, after diuretics
               Fine granular casts—may be present normally, eg after exercise
               Coarse granular casts—abnormal, seen in various renal disorders
               Red cell casts—imply glomerular disease and glomerular bleeding
               White cell casts–occur in glomerulonephritis and pyelonephritis
               Epithelial casts—usually reﬂect tubular damage
 Crystals      Phosphate, urate, and oxalate crystals may not be pathological, but
               are also seen in Proteus UTI and hyperuricaemia.
See the ‘NICE Guidance on UTI in Children’. Available at: http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/
pdf/CG54quickrefguide.pdf
694    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Renal failure
      Causes of acute renal failure
      Pre-renal Hypovolaemia (bleeding, dehydration, sepsis), heart failure,
      nephrotic syndrome.
      Renal Haemolytic uraemic syndrome, glomerulonephritis, acute tubular
      necrosis, drugs.
      Post-renal Obstruction following trauma or calculi.
      Presentation and investigation
      Presentation varies according to the cause. Emergency investigations include
      MSU for microscopy, culture and sensitivity, urine and plasma osmolality, U&E,
      blood glucose, FBC, albumin, LFTs, clotting screen, and ECG monitoring.
      Treatment
      Get expert help early. Pre-renal failure from hypovolaemia (urine: plasma
      osmolality ratio usually >5) should respond to treatment of the underlying
      condition and an IV ﬂuid challenge (20mL/kg of 0.9% saline, ±colloid/blood
      products, depending on cause). Urinary catheter and CVP monitoring may
      help to assess ﬂuid status. Urgent ultrasound can assess for obstruction
      of the urinary tract, the presence of stones and vascular ﬁlling status. ED
      treatment of renal failure focuses on hyperkalaemia and hypertension.
      Hyperkalaemia Children presenting with hyperkalaemia (K+>7) in
      advanced renal failure may require emergency measures prior to dialysis.
      Obtain expert help. Give 0.5mL/kg of 10% calcium gluconate over 5min
      to stabilize the myocardium if there are ECG changes (widened QRS
      complexes or tall T waves). Give sodium bicarbonate 1mmol/kg IV
      and commence an IVI of glucose (0.5g/kg/hr) with insulin (0.05U/kg/hr).
      Consider nebulized salbutamol (2.5mg if <3 years; 5mg if 3–7 years; 10mg
      if >7years) or Calcium Resonium® 1g/kg PO or PR. Nebulized salbutamol,
      IV sodium bicarbonate, glucose/insulin all temporarily d serum K+ by
      shifting it into cells: deﬁnitive treatment (dialysis) will still be required.
      Hypertension Hypertension related to volume overload in renal failure
      may require IV nitrate therapy in the ED (as for pulmonary oedema), but
      otherwise seek expert help for further intervention.
      Nephrotic syndrome Most cases of oedema, heavy proteinuria and
      hypoalbuminaemia (±hypercholesterolaemia) are idiopathic (‘minimal change
      nephropathy’). Presentation is diverse and includes: anorexia, lethargy, frothy
      urine, mild diarrhoea, abdominal pain, ascites, oliguria, peri-orbital, or genital
      oedema. The prognosis is generally good, but peritonitis, renal or cerebral
      venous thrombosis may occur. Check U&E, albumin, LFTs, FBC, complement,
      cholesterol and lipids. Refer for further investigation/treatment.
      Haemolytic uraemic syndrome Micro-angiopathic haemolytic
      anaemia, thrombocytopenia and renal failure of haemolytic uraemic
      syndrome typically affect infants/toddlers following a diarrhoeal illness
      (E. coli 0157, verocytotoxin, or shigella). The disease is also associated
      with SLE, HIV and various tumours. The child may present oliguric or
      anuric with d conscious level due to encephalopathy. Mortality is >5%.
      FBC reveals anaemia with visible RBC fragments, thrombocytopenia,
      and leucocytosis. Coombs test is –ve. Urea and creatinine are usually
      i and there may be electrolyte disturbances. Treat life-threatening
      hyperkalaemia as above and refer for possible dialysis and transfusion.
                                                           HAEMATURIA          695

Haematuria
Dark or discoloured urine is frightening for both the child and parents.
Although it may reﬂect haematuria, it may reﬂect other causes: very
concentrated urine, beetroot, porphyria, conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia,
free Hb or myoglobin (usually black, as seen in rhabdomyolysis and
malaria), or drugs (Table 15.8).
Table 15.8 Possible alternative causes of discoloured urine
Drug/food                                             Colour
Rifampicin                                            Orange/pink
Desferrioxamine, senna, rhubarb                       Brown
Methylene blue                                        Green

If haematuria is conﬁrmed by urinalysis, obtain a full history, remembering
to ask about preceding illnesses and trauma, foreign travel, drug history,
and family history of renal or bleeding disorders. Full examination includes
BP and a careful check for abdominal masses and oedema.
Causes of macroscopic haematuria
• UTI (including schistosomiasis).
• Glomerulonephritis.
• Trauma.
• Wilm’s tumour.
• Bleeding disorder.
• Urinary tract stones.
• Drugs (warfarin, cyclophosphamide).
• Factitious.
Microscopic haematuria may be associated with: exercise, hypercalciuria
or be familial.
Glomerulonephritis is often an immune reaction following an URTI due
to B-haemolytic Strep infection 2–3 weeks previously. It may present with
haematuria, oliguria ±hypertension and uraemia. A similar presentation
can occur with Henloch–Schönlein purpura (b Purpuric rashes, p.664),
SLE or Berger’s disease (mesangial IgA nephropathy).
Investigation
Send MSU and obtain plain X-rays of the urinary tract if there is
abdominal pain suggesting stones (relatively rare). Check U&E, blood
glucose, FBC, clotting screen, and if signiﬁcant bleeding (or if haematuria
follows trauma) X-match. Further tests may be required (throat swab,
urine, and serum osmolalities, viral titres, antistreptolysin-O, antinuclear
antibodies, complement levels), but do not assist emergency treatment.
Management
Severe haematuria with clots requires resuscitation with IV ﬂuids (±blood),
but is uncommon in children, except after trauma. Treat associated severe
hypertension or hyperkalaemia associated with renal failure as described
opposite. Refer children with haematuria of non-traumatic origin to the
paediatrician.
696    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Poisoning in children
      Paediatric poisoning may take many forms:
      • Neonatal poisoning from drugs taken by mother prior to birth
        (eg opioids, benzodiazepines).
      • ‘Accidental’ (unintentional) poisoning is the most common form
        of poisoning. It largely involves toddlers and pre-school children
        (boys > girls), who are at particular risk because of their innate
        curiosity and considerable indiscretion in putting things in their
        mouths. Children may be poisoned by any drugs that they can get
        their hands on, but also mushrooms, berries, plants, household items
        (eg disinfectant) and other objects misinterpreted as drink, food or
        sweets (eg button batteries).
      • Inadvertent self-poisoning with recreational drugs (including alcohol and
        volatile agents).
      • Iatrogenic poisoning by administration of the wrong dose ± wrong
        drug can happen with frightening ease. Paediatric dosage charts,
        calculators, obsessional checking, attention to detail and restriction of
        junior doctors’ hours should help to prevent this in the ED.
      • Deliberate self-poisoning in an apparent suicide attempt occurs in older
        children.
      • Intentional poisoning by a parent, guardian, or carer is a sinister aspect
        of child abuse, which includes fabricated or induced illness (b p.772).
        The child may present in a bizarre fashion, with a non-speciﬁc illness, for
        which the diagnosis is not immediately apparent.
      Approach
      Follow the general guidelines described in b pp.180–7 to treat poisoned
      patients, with initial attention to oxygenation (airway), ventilation
      (breathing) and circulation. Links to the National Poisons Information
      Service (www.toxbase.org Telephone 0844 892 0111) will provide
      advice for speciﬁc poisonings (b p.180). With notable exceptions (eg
      paracetamol, opioids, iron, and digoxin) there are few ‘antidotes’ available:
      treatment is often largely supportive.
      Try to elicit the substance(s) ingested, the amount involved and the time
      since ingestion. The majority of ingestions are unintentional and the time
      to presentation is often short. Gastric emptying procedures are rarely
      performed, and should be considered only if a life-threatening amount
      of a drug has been ingested in the previous hour and the airway can be
      protected (b p.184). Avoid ipecac (ipecacuanha), which is ineffective in
      d drug absorption and can be dangerous. Never try to empty the stomach
      following ingestion of petrol or corrosives (b p.205).
      Charcoal
      The role of charcoal (dose 1g/kg PO in infants; 15–30g in older children) in
      paediatric poisoning is limited by its lack of palatability. Attempts are cur-
      rently being made to make charcoal more palatable, yet remain effective.
                             PREVENTION OF PAEDIATRIC POISONING                    697

Prevention of paediatric poisoning
Background
Poisoning in children is very common. More than 40,000 children
present to hospital in the UK each year, many of whom are admitted for
observation. Thankfully, relatively few (10–15 per year) die. More than
75% of paediatric unintentional ingestions involve drugs and poisons in
the home that are plainly visible to the child. Poisoning is particularly likely
to occur at times of ‘stress’ (eg arrival of new baby, disturbed parental
relationships, moving house) when there may be d supervision and
disruption of the usual routine. Perhaps partly for this reason, children
who present with a ﬁrst episode of poisoning are at i risk of further
episodes. It is therefore important to advise the parents of ways of
preventing poisoning in children (see list below).
Ofﬁcial measures: packaging of drugs
Legislation has been introduced to try to tackle the problem of poisoning
in children. Perhaps the most successful has been the widespread adoption
of child-resistant drug containers. Unfortunately, it is not yet mandatory
for these containers to be used for liquid drugs or potentially dangerous
household items, such as bleach. Some drugs are presented in ‘strip
packaging’, in the hope that an impulsive child would lose interest before
gaining access to a signiﬁcant quantity.
Advice for parents (consider providing a leaﬂet)
• Provide adequate supervision for toddlers and young children,
  particularly when visiting friends and relatives.
• Keep all medicines locked out of reach in a cupboard.
• Only purchase those drugs presented in child-resistant containers.
• Dispose of out-of-date drugs and those no longer required.
• Never refer to drugs as ‘sweets’ in an attempt to encourage the child to
  take them.
• Take medicines out of sight of the child to help prevent imitation.
• Keep all alcohol, perfumes, cosmetics, detergents, and bleaches out of
  reach.
• Ensure that all turpentine, paints, and weed killers are securely locked
  and inaccessible.
• Give away all toxic plants.
• Keep ashtrays and waste baskets empty.
698    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Abdominal pain in children
      The approach to the initial assessment and management of children
      presenting with abdominal pain is similar in many ways to that in adults
      (b p.504). Beware underlying ‘medical’ causes (eg DKA, pneumonia).
      Remember that disease processes may progress with great rapidity in
      children, therefore adopt a low threshold for referring children with
      abdominal pain to the surgical team. Whilst many of the common causes
      of abdominal pain are the same in children as in adults (eg b Acute
      appendicitis, p.507), be aware of causes that are typically paediatric
      (eg intussusception). Likewise, certain causes of intestinal obstruction are
      seen almost exclusively in children.
      Paediatric causes of intestinal obstruction
      • Congenital (eg oesophageal/duodenal atresia, Hirschsprung’s disease).
      • Meconium ileus.
      • Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.
      • Intussusception.
      • Hernia (inguinal, umbilical).
      Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
      Features
      This condition is relatively common, typically presenting with effortless
      vomiting at between 2–10 weeks. It occurs more frequently in boys than
      girls and in ﬁrst-born children. Vomiting becomes projectile in nature, with
      progressive dehydration and constipation. The vomit is not bile-stained.
      After vomiting, the baby appears hungry and keen to feed again. In
      advanced cases, there may be a profound hypochloraemic alkalosis, with
      associated hypokalaemia.
      Diagnosis
      Look for visible peristalsis. Abdominal palpation conﬁrms the diagnosis if
      an olive-sized lump is felt in the epigastrium (most prominent during a test
      feed). If the diagnosis is suspected, but not proven clinically, resuscitate
      (as below) and arrange USS.
      Management
      Once diagnosed, keep the infant nil by mouth. Insert an IV cannula and
      send blood for U&E, glucose, and FBC. Commence ﬂuid resuscitation
      under senior guidance and refer to the surgeon—operative treatment
      needs to be delayed until dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities have
      been corrected (this may take >24hr). Defer insertion of a NG tube for
      appropriately experienced staff.
      Volvulus
      This is associated with congenital malrotations, but may occur in other
      circumstances also (eg Meckel’s diverticulum, adhesions from previous
      surgery). It can present with abdominal pain and other features of intestinal
      obstruction (vomiting, distension), sometimes with a palpable mass.
      Obtain an abdominal X-ray and refer promptly to the surgical team in
      order to maximize the chance of intervening to preserve bowel.
                                        ABDOMINAL PAIN IN CHILDREN               699

Intussusception
Telescoping of one segment of bowel into another may affect the small
or large bowel, but most cases are ileocolic. Typically affects children
aged between 6 months and 4 years. The child may suddenly become
distressed, roll up into a ball, and appear unwell. Vomiting may develop
and the child may pass a ‘redcurrant jelly’ stool. These features, however,
together with pyrexia and a palpable mass, are not invariably present:
sometimes the presentation is shock without obvious cause. X-rays may
be normal or reveal an absent caecal shadow.
If intussusception is suspected, refer urgently to the surgical team.
The diagnosis may be conﬁrmed by air or barium enema, which may
also be curative, by reducing the intussusception. A barium enema
characteristically reveals a ‘coiled spring’ sign or sudden termination of the
barium, but is contra-indicated if there is evidence of perforation.
Acute appendicitis (see b p.507)
Consider this diagnosis in any child presenting with abdominal pain. Acute
appendicitis can occur in children of all ages. It can be a difﬁcult diag-
nosis to make, especially in the very young. ‘Atypical’ clinical presentation
(eg diarrhoeal illness) is often associated with delayed diagnosis and an i
rate of perforation. Do not perform a rectal examination—in the unlikely
event of this being considered essential, leave it to the surgical team.
Abdominal mass
There are many causes of abdominal masses in children, many of which
may be relatively benign and asymptomatic:
• Full bladder.
• Full colon.
• Enlarged liver and/or spleen.
• Pregnancy in older children.
• Hydronephrosis.
• Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (see opposite).
• Appendix mass.
• Intussusception.
• Volvulus.
• Neuroblastoma.
• Nephroblastoma (Wilm’s tumour).
Intra-abdominal malignancy
Neuroblastoma and nephroblastoma may reach a large size before causing
symptoms (eg haemorrhage into the tumour).
Neuroblastomas arise most commonly from the adrenal glands, but may
occur at any point along the sympathetic chain.
Nephroblastomas (Wilm’s tumours) arise from the kidneys and may present
with haematuria.
All children with suspected malignant abdominal masses require CT scan
and/or USS investigation—refer urgently to the surgical team.
700    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Inguinal and scrotal swellings
      Painless groin and scrotal lumps
      The parents or child who discovers a lump may become very concerned.
      The absence of pain is to some extent reassuring, in that an acute surgical
      problem is unlikely. Ascertain when the swelling appeared, whether it
      changes in size or disappears, or whether there are any other symptoms.
      Reducible inguinal hernia
      Inguinal herniae in childhood result from a persistent patent processus
      vaginalis and are therefore indirect in nature. They are commoner in boys
      than girls and often bilateral. The history is typically of an intermittent
      swelling, which appears with coughing or straining. If the swelling can be
      demonstrated, it will be impossible to get above it. If it cannot be demon-
      strated, a thickened spermatic cord may be palpated (sometimes known
      as the ‘silk sign’). Refer neonatal herniae for admission and surgery, refer
      infants and older children to a surgical clinic for elective surgery.
      Painless irreducible inguinal hernia
      Refer all irreducible inguinal hernias for admission and surgery (preceded
      by gallows traction in the infant).
      Hydrocoele
      This transilluminable painless scrotal swelling has similar aetiology to
      inguinal hernia. It appears gradually, rather than suddenly, and does not
      empty or reduce on palpation. Refer to a surgical clinic. An encysted
      hydrocoele of the cord may be impossible to distinguish from an irreduc-
      ible inguinal hernia and therefore requires surgical exploration.
      Undescended, retractile, or ectopic testis
      Complete descent of the testis has yet to occur in 3% of term infants and
      30% of premature infants. Arrange surgical follow-up if the testis cannot
      be brought down to the fundus of the scrotal sac: orchidopexy will be
      required if the testis fails to descend by 4 years.
      Inguinal lymphadenopathy
      This is on the list of differential diagnoses of painless inguinal swellings.
      Look for a potential source of infection in the leg and for involvement of
      any other lymph node groups.
      Idiopathic scrotal oedema
      An obscure allergic condition of the scrotal skin is possibly a variant of
      angioneurotic oedema. Redness, mild tenderness and oedema are not
      limited to one hemiscrotum. The testis is normal. The condition settles
      spontaneously, a process helped by antihistamines (eg chlorphenamine
      PO, doses: child 1–2 years require 1mg bd; 2–5 years require 1mg qds;
      6–12 years require 2mg qds). If in doubt—refer.
                                 INGUINAL AND SCROTAL SWELLINGS                 701

Painful groin and scrotal lumps
Painful irreducible inguinal hernia
Likely to contain obstructed or strangulated small bowel. Conﬁrm
clinical suspicion of intestinal obstruction (pain, vomiting and abdominal
distension) by X-ray. Resuscitate as necessary with IV ﬂuids, give analgesia
and refer for surgery.
Testicular torsion
Commonest in the neonatal period and around puberty. In the neonatal
period the torsion is extravaginal in nature and often diagnosed late. Later
in childhood, torsion of a completely descended testis is intravaginal
due to a high insertion of tunica vaginalis. Undescended testes are also
at particular risk of torsion. Classical presentation is with sudden onset
severe pain and vomiting. Occasionally, the pain is entirely abdominal.
Examination reveals a red, tender swollen testis. The opposite testis may
be seen to lie horizontally, rather than vertically (Angell’s sign). Fast and
refer all suspected torsions for urgent surgery: exploration, untwisting and
bilateral orchidopexy.
Torsion of the hydatid of Morgagni
This remnant of the paramesonephric duct on the superior aspect of the
testis is prone to undergo torsion, causing pain and vomiting. A discrete
tender nodule may be palpable. Refer, as surgical exploration and excision
of the hydatid provides more rapid relief than the alternative conservative
treatment (analgesia and rest).
Epididymo-orchitis
Unusual in paediatric age group, but may be associated with UTI. A painful
swollen red testis and epididymis usually develops over a longer period of
time, but may be difﬁcult to distinguish from testicular torsion. Refer for
an urgent surgical opinion.
Mumps orchitis
The diagnosis is usually apparent because of parotitis (b Childhood infec-
tious diseases, p.222). Refer if there is doubt or symptoms are severe.
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Occasionally, testicular pain may be one of the initial presenting complaints
of Henoch-Schönlein purpura (see b p.664).
702    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Foreskin problems and zip entrapment
      Phimosis
      The foreskin may normally remain non-retractile up to age 5 years.
      Foreskin that remains non-retractile after this, which ‘balloons’ on
      micturition, or is associated with recurrent balanitis may beneﬁt from
      surgery (preputial stretch or circumcision). Advise the parents to see their
      GP to discuss referral to a paediatric surgeon.
      Balanitis
      Balanitis produces redness, swelling, and even pus. Take a swab, check
      for glucose in urine and send an MSU. Treat with amoxicillin (10mg/kg
      PO qds) or erythromycin (10mg/kg PO qds). If redness and swelling involve
      the whole penis: refer for IV antibiotics.
      Paraphimosis
      Irreducible, retracted foreskin results in pain and swelling of the glans.
      As in the adult, cold compresses and lubricating jelly may allow reduction.
      If not, refer for reduction under GA.
      Penile zip entrapment
      Unfortunately, underpants do not completely protect boys (and
      sometimes men) from catching their foreskins in trouser zips. On many
      occasions the entrapment will be released quickly by the child or parent.
      On others, the child will present to the ED.
      The optimal method to achieve release depends upon the entrapment
      • 15% zip foreskin through the moveable part of the zip, so that it is simply
        caught between the teeth of the zip alone. In this case, achieve easy
        release by cutting transversely through the zip below the entrapment.
      • 85% of entrapments involve the foreskin being caught between the
        teeth and the moveable part of the zip. Local anaesthetic (either
        injection using plain lidocaine or topical gel) may allow manipulation and
        release. If this fails, the least traumatic option is to divide the moveable
        part of the zip into 2 parts by dividing the central section (‘median bar’
        or ‘bridge’) using bone cutters or wire cutters (use gauze to protect
        against parts of the zip ﬂying off; Fig. 15.16). Older children and adults
        may tolerate this in the ED, but in younger boys referral for release
        under GA is sensible. Circumcision is rarely required.
                          FORESKIN PROBLEMS AND ZIP ENTRAPMENT           703

                                        Strong wire
                                          cutters

                                                 Zip slider
      Zip bridge
                                                Zip bridge
                                        Zip bridge
                                                              Top view

             Zip slider
                                        Zip slider
Side view

Fig. 15.16 Method to achieve release from zip entrapment.
704    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      The limping child
      This common problem can cause diagnostic difﬁculty, particularly in the
      young child who cannot provide a history and is difﬁcult to examine. It is
      important to try to exclude some causes of a limp that will require urgent
      treatment.
      Consider the following
      • Trauma (fractures, soft tissue injury, FB in foot, NAI).
      • Speciﬁc hip problems (Perthes’, slipped epiphysis, irritable hip—
        b p.706).
      • Infection (osteomyelitis, septic arthritis).
      • Arthritis (Still’s disease, juvenile ankylosing spondylitis).
      • Osteochondritis (b p.708).
      • Referred pain from inﬂammatory process elsewhere.
      • Malignant disease (Ewing’s sarcoma, leukaemia).
      • Sickle cell crisis (b p.176).
      Adopt the following approach:
      History
      Ascertain whether the problem developed suddenly (eg after trauma) or
      gradually. Enquire about recent illness and other symptoms, including joint
      pains elsewhere.
      Examination
      Check T*. If the child is walking, assess the gait. Carefully inspect all of
      the painful leg for erythema, swelling, deformity, and note the position
      adopted. Exclude a relatively simple problem, such as a FB embedded
      in the foot. Note any skin rashes. Palpate the limb for tenderness, joint
      effusions, and range of movement (compare with the other side). If the
      child will not walk, but can crawl without any apparent discomfort, this
      localizes the problem to below the knee (thereby avoiding the need to
      request ‘routine’ X-rays of the hips).
      Investigation
      If the child can walk, looks well, and there is no abnormality apparent on
      examination, consider providing analgesia and arranging to review after
      a few days, rather than undertaking all of the following investigations
      immediately. Ensure the parents are told that they should return earlier
      if the limp gets worse.
      X-ray the tender or swollen part, particularly if there is a history of injury.
      If there is no obvious tenderness, X-ray the pelvis to include both hips.
      If the X-rays do not reveal a fracture, check WCC and CRP (or plasma
      viscosity/ESR). If the hip is implicated, but X-rays are normal, request USS
      of the hip (some experts prefer to use USS as the initial investigation). MRI
      is emerging as having a potentially useful role. Follow local ED protocols
      where available.
      Management
      Treat according to the cause (see opposite and b pp.706–9).
                                                   THE LIMPING CHILD          705

Trauma
Treat according to cause, which may include a FB in the soft tissues. There
may not always be a clear history of injury—this particularly applies to
toddler’s fracture (see b Paediatric lower limb injuries, p.726).
Osteomyelitis
Acute osteomyelitis usually results from blood-borne spread of a
distant pathogen (eg from the respiratory tract). Staph. aureus is usually
responsible, with almost invariable involvement of the metaphysis of a
long bone (most commonly proximal or distal femur, or distal tibia).
Features i T*, lethargy, localized tenderness (which may be misdiagnosed
as trauma). Septic shock may occur (especially in infants).
Investigations i WCC, i CRP, i ESR >50mm/hr (but all may be normal
initially). X-ray changes occur after 810days.
Treatment If suspected, refer for admission, IV antibiotics 9 surgical
drilling/drainage.
Septic arthritis
Most commonly, Staph. aureus infection in the hip or knee. Occasionally
secondary to penetrating injury but usually haematogenous spread from a
distant site. Constitutional symptoms, fever and joint pain occur. A joint
effusion may be clinically evident. Joint movement is likely to be severely
impaired. Investigations may reveal i WCC, i CRP and i ESR. Refer for
urgent conﬁrmatory joint aspiration and treatment.
Non-septic arthritis
Multiple painful joints are more likely to be due to a juvenile arthritic
process (eg RA or ankylosing spondylitis) than septic arthritis. Pain felt
in several joints frequently accompanies a variety of infections and other
diseases, eg rubella, rheumatic fever, Henoch–Schönlein purpura. Refer to
the paediatrician for further investigation.
706    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      The painful hip
      The limping child may be able to localize pain to the hip, but hip pain may
      be referred to the knee. Hip problems causing a limp include trauma,
      infection and other disorders as in b The limping child, p.704. Speciﬁc hip
      problems include:
      Perthes’ disease (Legg–Calvé–Perthes’ disease)
      Aseptic necrosis of the upper femoral (capital) epiphysis presents with a
      painful limp in children aged 3–10 years. Boys are affected more than girls
      (M:F = 4:1). 15% are bilateral. Aetiology is unclear, but Perthes’ disease is
      often grouped with the osteochondritides (b p.708). Often d range of hip
      movement due to pain. FBC, CRP, ESR, and blood cultures are normal.
      X-ray changes reﬂect stage of disease and are progressive (as opposite):
      1 i joint space on medial aspect of capital epiphysis (compare sides)
      2 i bone density in affected epiphysis (appears sclerotic)
      3 Fragmentation, distortion (ﬂattening) and lateral subluxation of upper
        femoral epiphysis (leaving part of the femoral head ‘uncovered’)
      4 Rarefaction of the adjacent metaphysis in which cysts may appear
      Treatment Refer for specialist assessment and treatment. Most cases
      respond satisfactorily to conservative therapy.
      Slipped upper femoral (capital) epiphysis (Fig. 15.18)
      This sometimes occurs during puberty and has been attributed to
      hormonal imbalance. It occurs in children (particularly boys: M:F = 3:1)
      who have one of 2 body types: obese with underdeveloped genitalia or
      tall, thin rapidly growing adolescent with normal sexual development.
      Presentation A child aged 10–16 years may develop a painful limp suddenly
      or gradually. Often there is a history of trauma. The leg may be slightly
      adducted, externally rotated, and shortened. Movement of affected hip is
      d compared with the other side (esp. abduction and internal rotation).
      X-ray Obtain AP pelvis and lateral hip views ± ‘frog-leg’ views. Subtle slips
      may only be seen on lateral view. Larger slips will be obvious on all views.
      Look for Trethowan’s sign: a line drawn along the superior border of the
      femoral neck normally cuts through the epiphysis (see Fig. 15.18).
      Treatment Refer to orthopaedics for internal ﬁxation ± manipulation.
      Complications Avascular necrosis, chondrolysis, and osteoarthritis.
      Irritable hip (‘transient synovitis’)
      Common cause of sudden painful hip and limp in children of all ages.
      Aetiology is unclear, but many cases appear to follow a viral illness.
      Presentation varies from a slight limp to great difﬁculty WB. X-rays are
      normal. USS may show a hip effusion and allow aspiration for microscopy
      and culture. (Apply tetracaine cream over the hip before USS).
      Pyrexia, i WCC, i CRP (and/or i ESR/plasma viscosity) suggest infection.
      Treatment If signiﬁcant physical signs (signiﬁcant pain, d movement,
      difﬁculty weight-bearing) or there is evidence suggesting infection, refer
      to the orthopaedic team for admission for rest, traction and further
      investigation. If physical signs are not dramatic and X-rays and blood tests
      normal, discharge with NSAID, advise rest and review within a few days.
                                                              THE PAINFUL HIP        707

Fig. 15.17 Changes in the hip in Perthes’ disease.

                                                        1

        P             A
                                                                       2

               N

  Lateral view showing normal (left)          AP view: Trethowan's sign; 1 normal,
         and abnormal (right)                           2 abnormal hip
Fig. 15.18 Slipped upper femoral epiphysis.
708    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Osteochondritis
      This term is applied to a heterogeneous array of non-infectious disorders
      affecting various epiphyses. They may be divided into 3 groups, according
      to the proposed aetiology (see Table 15.9).
      Crushing osteochondritis
      Apparently spontaneous necrosis of an ossiﬁcation centre occurs at a time
      of rapid growth. This is followed by new bone formation.
      Perthes’ disease—see b The painful hip, p.706.
      Scheuermann’s disease Fragmentation of low thoracic/upper lumbar
      vertebral epiphyseal plates of adolescents results in chronic back pain and
      a ‘round-shouldered’ kyphotic appearance. X-rays show anterior wedging
      of vertebral bodies, with sclerotic notches (Schmorl’s nodes) on inferior
      or superior vertebral borders. Diagnostic criteria are >50* of kyphosis
      and wedging in 3 adjacent vertebrae. Treat symptomatically with NSAID
      and refer for orthopaedic follow-up.
      Kohler’s disease Avascular necrosis of the navicular affects children
      (particularly boys) aged 3–5 years. A painful limp develops, with tenderness
      on the dorsum of the foot over the navicular. The sclerotic fragmented
      navicular seen on X-ray is also seen in many asymptomatic children. Treat
      symptoms with rest, NSAID and orthopaedic follow-up. If symptoms are
      severe, consider BKPOP.
      Kienbock’s and Freiberg’s disease—usually affect young adults
      Traction apophysitis
      The pull of a strong tendon causes damage to the unfused apophysis to
      which it is attached.
      Osgood-Schlatter’s disease Traction apophysitis of the tibial attachment of
      the patellar tendon is especially seen in boys aged 10–15 years. Anterior
      knee pain after exercise is characteristic. The tibial tuberosity is prominent
      and tender. The pain may be reproduced by attempted extension against
      resistance.
      X-rays are not always needed, but show an enlarged and sometimes
      fragmented tibial tuberosity. Treat symptomatically with rest, NSAID and
      orthopaedic follow-up. Most settle with conservative measures.
      Johansson–Larsen’s disease (Sinding Larsen’s disease) Traction apophysitis
      of the lower pole of the patella in young adolescents results in local
      tenderness. Treat with rest, NSAID and orthopaedic follow-up.
      Sever’s disease Traction apophysitis of the calcaneal attachment of the
      Achilles tendon occurs in 8–14-year-olds. The resulting limp is associated
      with local calcaneal tenderness. X-rays may reveal a fragmented sclerotic
      calcaneal apophysis. Treat with rest, NSAID, a heel raise and orthopaedic
      follow-up.
                                                     OSTEOCHONDRITIS           709

Osteochondritis dissecans
A piece of articular cartilage and adjacent bone become partially or
completely separated as an avascular fragment. The cause is believed to
be an osteochondral fracture from repeated minor trauma. The lateral
aspect of the medial condyle of distal femur is the most commonly affected
site. Intermittent pain, swelling and joint effusion result. If the fragment
becomes detached as a loose body, locking or giving way may occur.
X-ray Demonstrates the fragment or defect.
Treatment Refer the locked knee immediately. Treat the remainder with
rest, consider crutches, and arrange orthopaedic follow-up.

Table 15.9 Classiﬁcation of osteochondritis
Type of                Bone affected        Eponym
osteochondritis
Crushing               Femoral head         Perthes’ disease (b p.706)
osteochondritis
                       Vertebrae            Scheuermann’s disease
                       2nd metatarsal head Freiberg’s disease
                       Navicular            Kohler’s disease
                       Lunate               Kienbock’s disease
                       Capitulum            Panner’s disease
Osteochondritis        Medial femoral
dissecans              condyle
                       Talus
                       Elbow
                       Metatarsal
Traction apophysitis   Tibial tuberosity    Osgood–Schlatter’s disease
                       Lower pole of patella Johansson–Larsen’s disease
                       Calcaneum            Sever’s disease
710    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Major paediatric trauma
      The background
      Trauma is the largest single cause of death in children: 8500 deaths/ year
      in the UK (Table 15.10). As in adults, blunt injury in children is far more
      common than penetrating injury. The number of deaths in children after
      trauma is dwarfed by the number who sustain serious injuries. Most
      serious injuries result from road trafﬁc collisions and falls.

       Table 15.10 Causes of trauma deaths in children
       Road trafﬁc collisions                                    48%
       Fires                                                     15%
       Drowning                                                  12%
       Hanging                                                     8%
       Falls                                                       8%
       Non-accidental injury                                       5%
       Other                                                       4%

      >70% of paediatric trauma deaths occur in the pre-hospital setting.
      Most of these children are either dead when found or have sustained
      overwhelming injuries. The greatest potential for reducing trauma
      deaths clearly lies with injury prevention. However, there is enormous
      potential to reduce the number of permanently disabled children by early
      identiﬁcation of injuries and expert treatment. The best outcome results
      from involvement of senior and experienced staff at an early stage. Prompt
      recognition of the seriously injured child is crucial to this.
      Pattern of injuries
      Anatomical and physiological differences mean that the pattern of injuries
      in children differ considerably from those in adults. Compared with
      adults, children have: smaller physical size, a relatively larger head, more
      compliant bones, a higher ratio of surface area to body weight, epiphyses.
      Experience and an awareness of the patterns of paediatric injury will
      assist resuscitation efforts. The smaller size and physical proximity of
      internal organs frequently results in the dissipated forces causing injuries
      to multiple structures (multiple injuries). The compliance of the bony
      thoracic cage in children allows signiﬁcant underlying organ injury without
      rib fractures. Similarly, certain injuries not uncommon in adults (eg rupture
      of thoracic aorta), rarely occur in children.
                                                    INJURY PREVENTION           711

Injury prevention
Terminology
The term ‘accident’ implies an unforeseen unintentional event, one which
occurs by chance. The implication is that ‘accidents’ cannot be prevented.
However, there is considerable evidence to suggest that ‘accidents’ are
far from random events, but are relatively predictable and amenable to
prevention. For this reason, medical experts now prefer to avoid use
of the terms ‘accidents’ and ‘accident prevention’ and refer to ‘injury
prevention’ instead.
Background
Injuries to children tend to occur more frequently in certain groups and
at certain times:
• Boys sustain more injuries than girls.
• Injuries are associated with social deprivation.
• Injuries often occur at times of family stress and change (including
   marital disharmony, moving house and holidays).
Prevention theory
Prevention of injury does not simply refer to physical injuries, but
poisonings also. Injuries and/or the effects of injuries may be prevented in
a number of different ways:
Primary prevention measures stop injuries occurring. For example, the
installation of fences around domestic swimming pools may reduce
drowning, locked medicine cabinets might prevent inadvertent poisoning.
Secondary prevention measures reduce the extent of harm caused by an
injurious event. The most obvious examples are helmets, seat belts, and
air bags in the context of road trafﬁc collisions.
Tertiary ‘prevention’ includes most forms of ﬁrst aid and hospital treatment,
and aims to limit the effect of an injury after it has already happened
(eg surgery to stop intra-abdominal haemorrhage, antidotes for certain
poisons).
Prevention strategies and the role of ED staff
The focus of hospital staff treating injured patients has understandably
always been the injuries themselves (‘tertiary prevention’). In addition
to any possible issues of NAI, ED staff need to consider how future
injuries to children might be prevented (eg by discussing with parents the
beneﬁts of bicycle helmets). In the context of an individual child, it may
sometimes be appropriate to contact the GP/health visitor with a view to
seeing if interventions might prevent future injuries to a particular child
and siblings.
More general interventions include:
• Leaﬂets and posters in the waiting room to target a captive audience
• Media involvement on certain issues, such as minimizing the risks of
  ﬁreworks and sparklers
Further details of children’s injuries and injury prevention are available
from the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (www.rospa.org.uk)
and the Child Accident Prevention Trust (www.capt.org.uk).
712    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Resuscitation of the injured child
      The priorities in managing major paediatric trauma (Airway, Breathing,
      Circulation) are the same as in adults (b p.320). Staff accustomed to
      treating adults may have difﬁculty with equipment sizes and drug doses.
      Estimate the child’s weight (b p.633). Call for help as soon as a seriously
      injured child arrives (or is expected) in the ED—senior ED doctor, ICU/
      PICU doctor and surgeon (preferably paediatric). It is often very helpful
      to seek the help of a paediatrician to assist with vascular access and,
      calculation of drug doses, particularly for pre-school children.
      Airway with cervical spine control
      Clear and secure the airway (suction and adjuncts) and provide O2.
      If the airway is obstructed, use jaw thrust (not head tilt/chin lift) and call
      for expert help (senior ED/PICU/ICU) as intubation may be required.
      Ensure that manual immobilization of the cervical spine is maintained,
      whilst a patient airway is being obtained. When the airway is secure, an
      appropriately-sized hard collar with tape and sandbags should be used
      until injury to the cervical spine has been excluded.
      Breathing
      Quickly exclude and treat life-threatening chest injuries. Children are
      prone to swallow air, placing them at risk of massive gastric dilatation (can
      cause d BP and subsequent aspiration): consider an orogastric tube.
      Circulation with haemorrhage control
      As in adults, hypotension is a late sign of hypovolaemia. Look carefully for
      other evidence: tachycardia, tachypnoea, agitation, lethargy, pale cold skin
      with d capillary reﬁll time (best elicited on the sternum). Obtain venous
      access (consider the intra-osseous route) as described on b p.640. Treat
      hypovolaemia by stopping haemorrhage (splinting fractures, applying
      pressure to wounds, prompt surgery for internal haemorrhage) and
      giving IV ﬂuid/blood resuscitation. Give a 10mL/kg IV 0.9% saline bolus
      rapidly and reassess. If there is no clinical improvement, give a further
      10mL/kg crystalloid IV ﬂuid bolus and repeat if necessary up to 40mL/kg.
      Remember that over-aggressive ﬂuid replacement may worsen the
      situation if the patient is suffering from internal haemorrhage. If further
      ﬂuid is required, give blood products (whole blood 20mL/kg or 10mL/kg
      packed cells) and request fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and platelets from the
      laboratory for massive transfusion.
      Disability
      Make a rapid assessment of the child’s neurological status (b p.356).
      Exposure
      Early complete inspection is mandatory, but subsequently cover the child
      as much as possible in order to d anxiety and prevent excessive heat loss.
                            RESUSCITATION OF THE INJURED CHILD               713

Analgesia (b Analgesia in speciﬁc situations, p.280)
Analgesia is often forgotten or not considered early enough, even with
major injuries. Prompt and adequate analgesia given to injured children
will gain their conﬁdence, enhancing assessment and treatment. Give IV
analgesia titrated according to response. Do not use IM or SC analgesia.
In severe pain give morphine IV
• Up to 100 mcg/kg over 5min if 6–12 months.
• Up to 200 mcg/kg over 5min if >12 months.
Certain fractures are amenable to LA nerve block techniques (eg femoral
nerve block for femoral shaft fractures—b p.304). Nasal diamorphine
(b Analgesia in speciﬁc situations, p.280) and Entonox® (b Analgesics:
Entonox® and ketamine, p.278) may also be useful for analgesia before IV
access is available.
Parents
Remember the parents’ needs: allocate a member of staff to this task
(b p.278). Children who have suffered a traumatic event are at risk of
developing post-traumatic stress disorder—inform the parents or guardians
about this. Brieﬂy describe possible symptoms (sleep disturbance, night-
mares, difﬁculty concentrating, and irritability). Suggest to the parents/
guardians that they contact the child’s GP if symptoms persist beyond one
month (NICE Clinical Practice Guideline 2005 (see http://www.nice.org.uk/
nicemedia/pdf/CG026fullguideline.pdf).
714    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Considerations in paediatric trauma
      Spinal injury
      Cervical spine injury is relatively uncommon in children, but keep the
      whole spine immobilized until history, examination ± X-rays exclude
      injury. Injuries in children tend to involve upper (C1–3 level), rather than
      lower cervical spine. Remember that rotatory subluxation may cause
      signiﬁcant cervical spine injury without fracture: the clue is combination of
      injury, neck pain and torticollis. Interpretation of cervical spine X-rays in
      younger children is frequently complicated by pseudo-subluxation of C2
      on C3 and of C3 on C4. If in doubt, continue immobilization and obtain
      an expert opinion.
      The paediatric spine is inherently more elastic so momentary inter-
      segmental displacement may endanger the cord without disrupting bones
      or ligaments. This can result in spinal cord injury without radiological
      abnormality (SCIWORA). Usually there are objective signs of injury,
      but these can be delayed. Therefore, if children present with transient
      neurological symptoms after neck injury, make sure you assess them
      carefully. Exclusion of signiﬁcant injury requires an alert child with normal
      spinal and neurological examination with no painful distracting injuries and
      normal radiology (rarely the case for the seriously injured child).
      Head injury
      Of those children who die from trauma, most succumb to head
      injuries. Anatomical differences should be borne in mind. In infants, unfused
      sutures allow the intracranial volume to i with intracranial haemorrhage,
      causing relatively large bleeds and even shock. Similarly, scalp wounds
      in infants and young children may bleed profusely and result in signiﬁcant
      hypovolaemia. Assessment of children may prove difﬁcult. An isolated
      episode of vomiting after minor head injury is a frequent occurrence. To
      assess level of consciousness, use the standard GCS (b p.361) for children
      aged ≥ 4 years; children aged <4 years require an adapted scale (b p.717,
      which contains further details about head injuries in children).
      Chest injury
      Signiﬁcant thoracic visceral injuries may occur without rib fractures. There
      is a relatively high incidence of pulmonary contusion. Children have little
      respiratory reserve and can desaturate quickly. If a chest drain is required
      to treat a pneumothorax or haemothorax, use a size appropriate for the
      size of the child (as indicated by Broselow tape).
      Abdominal and pelvic injury
      Look for hypovolaemia. Abdominal palpation cannot yield useful infor-
      mation until child’s cooperation and conﬁdence are gained. Restrict any
      PR and PV examinations to the senior surgeon. USS and/or CT scan has
      replaced DPL. Gastric tubes are useful to treat the air swallowing and
      gastric dilatation prevalent in injured children. Insert an appropriately-sized
      urinary catheter if urine cannot be passed spontaneously or if accurate
      output measurement is required (eg after severe burns).
                          CONSIDERATIONS IN PAEDIATRIC TRAUMA                   715

Burns
Burns and smoke inhalation from house ﬁres still cause death in many chil-
dren each year. Even more frequently, children present with scalds from
hot or boiling liquids. The majority of these results from simple incidents
in the home: ensure that treatment includes injury prevention advice for
parents (b p.711). Remember that some (occasionally characteristic)
burns may reﬂect NAI. Assessment and treatment of the burned child
follows similar lines to those in adults; urgent priorities include securing
the airway (with an uncut ET tube) and adequate analgesia (b p.320). IV
ﬂuid requirements in major burns depend upon the extent of the burn (use
Lund–Browder charts, b p.391) and clinical response (see b p.390).
Drowning and submersion incidents
Children continue to die from drowning each year despite improved
swimming education. Their high surface area to body weight ratio makes
them prone to hypothermia. Cardiac arrest after immersion warrants
prolonged resuscitation (b p.259). Presume cervical spine injury and
immobilize the neck. Prolonged submersion (>8min), no respiratory effort
after 40min of CPR, persistent coma, persistent pH<7.0, persistent PaO2
<8kPa imply a poor prognosis. Hypothermia favours a better prognosis.
Of those who survive after hospital CPR, 70% make a complete recovery.
Wounds in children
Older children may allow wounds to be explored, cleaned, and sutured
under LA, providing they are given appropriate explanation (sometimes
it is worth demonstrating on teddy ﬁrst) and a parent is allowed to stay
with them. Injection of LA is least painful if a ﬁne needle is employed and
the LA is warmed, buffered and injected slowly. Some children, however,
do not tolerate LA. Whilst some superﬁcial wounds may be cleaned and
closed (steristrips or tissue glue) without anaesthesia, often sedation
or GA is needed. Anaesthesia is needed to allow adequate exploration
and cleaning of the wound and to d risks of infection and tattooing from
embedded dirt. Never allow the lack of co-operation to compromise
treatment, particularly with facial wounds, where wound closure under
GA may produce the best cosmetic result.
Ketamine
Ketamine can be used in the ED as an alternative to GA and provides
excellent analgesia for undertaking minor procedures in children (b p.278;
see http://www.collemergencymed.ac.uk/CEM/Clinical%20Effectiveness
%20Committee/Guidelines/Clinical%20Guidelines/default.asp). Ketamine
should only be used by clinicians experienced in its use and capable of
managing any airway complications. Ketamine is contraindicated if:
• The child has had a full meal within 3hr.
• There is a high risk of laryngospasm (active respiratory infection, active
  asthma, age <12 months).
• There are severe psychological problems (cognitive or motor delay or
  severe behavioural problems).
• Cardiovascular disease (congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathy, i BP).
• Signiﬁcant head injury or neurological disease, porphyria, hyperthyroidism.
716    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Head injuries in children
      The principles of head injury management in children are the same as in
      adults (b pp.362–7), but there are some important differences (including
      the assessment of conscious level in small children).
      Causes of head injury
      Most head injuries in children are due to falls, but few of these cause
      serious injury. Severe head injury is often the result of a child running out
      in front of a vehicle. Some deaths are caused by NAI (b p.731), especially
      in babies who have been shaken violently, dropped, or thrown.
      Assessment of a head-injured child
      History
      Record details of the injurious event, the time it occurred and the
      condition of the child before and after injury. Ascertain if the child was
      previously well. In particular, elicit any history of ﬁts or bleeding disorder.
      An infection can render a child prone to falls and also cause subsequent
      symptoms: a small child who vomits after a fall may be suffering from otitis
      media rather than the effects of a head injury.
      Determine the condition of the child immediately after injury: if he cried
      at once, he did not lose consciousness. Record if he was unconscious,
      confused or drowsy (and for how long) and whether he vomited or was
      unsteady or dizzy. Ask about headache. Remember to take into account
      the fact that a child might normally be asleep at the time he is examined.
      Examination
      Do not use the standard adult GCS (b p.361) in children aged <4 years—
      instead use the adapted scale opposite. Exclude hypoglycaemia. Note
      whether the child looks well and is behaving normally. Measure pupil size
      and check reactivity. Examine the head for signs of injury, but also look for
      injuries elsewhere. Check T* and consider co-existing illness, such as ear,
      throat, or urinary infections, or occasionally meningitis.
      Management of head injury in children
      When faced with a child with severe injuries summon senior help and
      follow standard resuscitation guidelines (b p.364). If there is any suspicion
      of NAI, involve the paediatrician at an early stage (b p.734).
      Indications for immediate CT scan (see www.nice.org.uk)
      Any 1 of: witnessed loss of consciousness for >5mins, any amnesia
      lasting >5mins, abnormal drowsiness, >2 discrete episodes of vomiting,
      clinically suspected NAI, post-traumatic epilepsy, GCS <14/15 or for an
      infant <15/15 on ED assessment, suspected open or depressed skull injury
      or tense fontanelle, any sign of basal skull fracture, focal neurological
      deﬁcit, infants with bruising, swelling or laceration >5cm, dangerous
      mechanism of injury.
      Admission or discharge
      Admit and observe children with continuing symptoms or signs, skull
      fracture or if mechanism of injury suggests serious trauma (eg fall from
      upstairs window). When contemplating discharge, ensure that adequate
      supervision from a responsible adult is available. Provide the parent/guardian
      with a verbal explanation and a written advice sheet (b p.367, or see www.sign.
      ac.uk or http://guidance.nice.org.uk/index.jsp?action=download&o=36265).
                                               HEAD INJURIES IN CHILDREN       717

Glasgow Coma Scale (children)
The ‘Eye’ and ‘Motor’ components of the GCS are similar as for adults
(b p.361), but a modiﬁed ‘Verbal score’ is used in small children. The
paediatric version of the GCS is shown in Table 15.11 (see www.nice.org.uk).
Assessment of the best verbal response is likely to require assistance from
parent/guardian/carer.
Table 15.11 Paediatric version of the Glasgow Coma Scale.
Best eye response                                                   Score
Eyes open spontaneously                                             4
Eye opening to verbal command                                       3
Eye opening to pain                                                 2
No eye opening                                                      1
Best verbal response
Alert, babbles, coos, words, or sentences to usual ability          5
Less than usual ability and/or spontaneous irritable cry            4
Cries inappropriately                                               3
Occasionally whimpers and/or moans                                  2
No vocal response                                                   1
Best motor response
Obeys commands or has normal spontaneous movements                  6
Localizes to painful stimuli or withdraws to touch                  5
Withdrawal to painful stimuli                                       4
Abnormal ﬂexion to pain (decorticate)                               3
Abnormal extension to pain (decerebrate)                            2
No motor response to pain                                           1
Total                                                               3–15

In pre-verbal or intubated patients, the ‘best grimace response’ may be
used in place of the ‘best verbal response’, as shown in Table 15.12.
Table 15.12 ‘Best grimace response’
                                                                    Score
Spontaneous normal facial/oro-motor activity                        5
Less than usual spontaneous ability and/or only responds to touch   4
Vigorous grimace to pain                                            3
Mild grimace to pain                                                2
No response to pain                                                 1

Transient cortical blindness after head injury
Occasionally, children present with blindness immediately or soon after
an apparently minor head injury. The mechanism is unclear, but in most
cases blindness resolves spontaneously within a few hrs. In the meantime,
arrange a CT scan to exclude intracranial haematoma.
718    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric fractures and dislocations
      Many paediatric fractures are similar to those in adults and prone to
      similar complications. Bones in children differ from those in adults in two
      important respects: they have epiphyses and are softer (hence fractures
      are more common than signiﬁcant ligament injuries). Certain types of
      paediatric fractures reﬂect these differences:
      Greenstick fracture An incomplete fracture in which one cortical surface of
      a bone breaks, whilst the other side bends.
      Torus (‘buckle’) fracture Another form of incomplete fracture characterized
      by a buckling of the cortex.
      Plastic deformation (‘bowing deformation’) Traumatic bending of long bone
      shaft without visible fracture occasionally occurs in young children.
      Epiphyseal injuries
      Injuries to the traction epiphyses are avulsion injuries (eg peroneus brevis
      insertion into the base of the 5th MT).
      Injuries to the pressure epiphyses at the end of long bones adjacent to
      the articular surface have been classiﬁed into 5 types—the Salter-Harris
      classiﬁcation (see Fig. 15.19):
      • Type I: the epiphysis separates or slips on the metaphysis.
      • Type II: a small piece of metaphysis separates with the epiphysis
         (commonest type).
      • Type III: a vertical fracture through the epiphysis joins that through the
         epiphyseal plate.
      • Type IV: a fracture passes from articular surface through the epiphyseal
         plate into metaphysis.
      • Type V: a crush injury to the epiphyseal plate (X-rays may be normal).
      Note that Salter–Harris types I and V may not be apparent on the initial
      X-ray. Undisplaced type I fractures often affect distal tibia and ﬁbula and
      may present with circumferential tenderness around the growth plate.
      Treat with POP and immobilization according to clinical ﬁndings.
      Epiphyseal growth plate injury
      A concern speciﬁc to any epiphyseal injury is that premature fusion of a
      growth plate may result, with resultant limb shortening and deformity. The
      risk correlates to some extent with the mechanism of injury and amount
      of force involved. The different Salter–Harris fractures carry a different
      level of risk of long-term growth plate problems. The risk is low for types I
      and II (particularly if undisplaced), moderate for type III and highest for
      types IV and V. Problems are usually averted if Salter–Harris type III and IV
      injuries are accurately reduced and held (eg by internal ﬁxation). Type V
      fractures are notoriously difﬁcult to diagnose and often complicated by
      premature fusion: fortunately they are relatively rare.
      Dislocations
      Dislocated joints are relatively unusual in children. Most commonly
      involved are the patella (b p.726) or the radial head (‘pulled elbow’—
      b p.724). Similarly, due to relative strengths of bone and ligament,
      injuries to ligaments are much less common in children than in adults.
                           PAEDIATRIC FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS           719

        Normal                          Type I                   Type II

         Type III                      Type IV                   Type V

Fig. 15.19 Salter–Harris classiﬁcation of epiphyseal injuries.
720    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Approach to limb injuries in children
      Limb injuries are very common in children. Whilst most of the points
      outlined in the general approach to trauma in adults may be successfully
      applied, certain modiﬁcations may be required.
      History
      Carefully elicit the mechanism of injury. The history may be confused or
      not forthcoming: try to establish a rapport with the child (and parents)
      nevertheless, in order to gain the child’s conﬁdence for the examination.
      Examination
      Search for evidence of a fracture (swelling, deformity, bony tenderness)
      and any associated neurovascular injury. Remember the adage that the
      most easily missed fracture is the second fracture: examine also for
      additional injuries to adjacent bones and joints.
      Is an X-ray required?
      If in doubt, obtain an X-ray. The ease with which children’s bones fracture
      and the difﬁculties with history and examination mean that it is sensible
      to adopt a low threshold for requesting X-rays. Ensure that two views at
      right angles are taken (eg AP and lateral), including associated joints.
      Interpreting X-rays
      Many fractures are subtle and easily missed. To minimize the chance of
      this occurring, visually trace around the cortex of each bone, looking for
      any irregularities. Interpretation of paediatric X-rays is complicated by
      the presence of various ossiﬁcation centres and accessory ossicles. Both
      are commonly mistaken for fractures (eg the olecranon epiphysis, the os
      trigonum and bipartite patella). Ossiﬁcation centres appear and fuse in a
      relatively predictable fashion, although the rate at which this occurs varies
      slightly from child to child (see Table 15.13). Knowledge of this process,
      combined with experience of seeing many paediatric X-rays, greatly assists
      interpretation. If in doubt about an X-ray, obtain a second opinion (there
      is no justiﬁcation for X-raying the uninjured side to see what ‘normal’ is).
      As an additional safeguard, most EDs now operate a policy of all X-rays
      being reported by a radiologist within 24hr.
      Treatment
      Give prompt, appropriate analgesia (b p.713). Follow the treatment
      suggested for speciﬁc fractures (b pp.722–7). Many undisplaced fractures
      will unite satisfactorily with a period of immobilization in POP (eg fractured
      distal radius), collar and cuff (eg fractured radial head) or broad arm sling
      (eg fractured clavicle). Minor angulation at the fracture site can be accepted,
      particularly in young children. Often, however, angulated fractures
      require MUA.
      Compound fractures and dislocations
      Give analgesia and give IV antibiotics (eg cefuroxime 25mg/kg slow IV
      bolus) and ensure tetanus cover. Take a digital photograph of the wound
      and keep it covered to minimize the risk of infection. Apply a dressing,
      splint the injured limb and refer the patient to the orthopaedic surgeon.
                                    APPROACH TO LIMB INJURIES IN CHILDREN                                    721

Table 15.13 Ossiﬁcation centres
Centre                                      First appears                     Fuses
Humeral head                                0–6 months                        18–21 years
Capitulum                                   3–6 months                        14–16 years
Medial epicondyle                           4–7 years                         18–21 years
Lateral epicondyle                          9–13 years                        14–16 years
Trochlea                                    9–10 years                        14–16 years
Radial head                                 4–5 years                         14–17 years
Distal radius                               6–12 months                       17–19 years
Olecranon                                   9–11 years                        13–16 years
Distal ulna                                 4–5 years                         16–18 years
Capitate                                    birth–3 months                    —
Hamate                                      birth–4 months                    —
Triquetral                                  1–3 years                         —
Lunate                                      2–4 years                         —
Trapezium                                   2–4 years                         —
Trapezoid                                   3–5 years                         —
Scaphoid                                    3–5 years                         —
Pisiform                                    9–12 years                        —
1st MC base                                 1–3 years                         14–17 years
Femoral head                                birth–6 months                    15–19 years
Greater trochanter                          3–4 years                         17–19 years
Lesser trochanter                           11–14 years                       15–18 years
Distal femur                                birth                             17–20 years
Patella                                     2–6 years                             4–8 years
Proximal tibia                              birth                             15–18 years
Distal tibia                                birth–6 months                    14–17 years
Proximal ﬁbula                              2–4 years                         16–19 years
Distal ﬁbula                                birth–1 year                      14–17 years
Posterior calcaneum                         5–8 years                         13–16 years
Central calcaneum                           birth                             13–16 years
Talus                                       birth                             —
Navicular                                   2–3 years                         —
Cuneiform bones                             1–3 years                         —
These dates are subject to individual variation. In general, epiphyses in girls fuse before those in boys.
722    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric upper limb injuries: 1
      Some fractures and dislocations are common in both adults and children
      and are treated similarly. Certain injuries are either speciﬁc to children
      or are treated differently in children: these are described in the next six
      pages. Paediatric fractures are painful and need appropriate immobilization
      and analgesia (b p.713).
      Clavicle fracture
      Common in children and adults alike. Treatment is similar: oral analgesia,
      broad arm sling and fracture clinic follow-up. Even if X-rays do not appear to
      show a fracture, treat as for a fracture. Warn parents about a developing
      lump (callus).
      Shoulder injuries
      Shoulder dislocations are relatively rare in children. Salter-Harris types I
      and II epiphyseal fractures may occur in the proximal humerus: refer
      to the orthopaedic team if signiﬁcant displacement or >20* angulation.
      Otherwise, give analgesia, collar and cuff, and fracture clinic follow-up.
      Humeral shaft fracture
      Check particularly for radial nerve injury. Remember to consider
      NAI especially if <3 years old or fracture is spiral. Treat as for adults
      (b p.459).
      Supracondylar humeral fracture
      Follows a fall on an outstretched hand. Swelling may be considerable.
      Check for associated neurovascular deﬁcit (particularly brachial artery,
      median and radial nerves). 25% of supracondylar fractures are undisplaced
      and may not be obvious on X-ray, although a joint effusion will be seen.
      Most fractures are displaced, angulated or rotated. The extent of angulation
      (both in sagittal and coronal planes) is easy to underestimate. Viewed
      from laterally, the capitulum normally makes an angle of 45* with the
      humeral shaft (see Fig. 15.20). The anterior humeral line (drawn along
      the front of humeral shaft on the lateral view) normally passes through the
      middle of the ossiﬁcation centre of the capitulum in the distal humerus.
      Also, the normal carrying angle (seen in AP view) is 10*. Record radial
      pulse frequently and consider compartment syndrome.
      Treatment provide analgesia and refer for manipulation under GA if:
      • Neurovascular deﬁcit: operation is urgent if circulation is compromised.
      • >50% displacement.
      • >20* angulation of the distal part posteriorly (see Fig. 15.21).
      • >10* medial or lateral angulation.
      Refer others for observation and admission if there is much swelling. If no
      signiﬁcant angulation, displacement or swelling, discharge with analgesia, a
      collar and cuff under a body bandage (elbow at 90* with conﬁrmed radial
      pulse present) and fracture clinic follow-up. Consider using a padded back
      slab POP if signiﬁcant pain is present.
      Complications malunion with persistent deformity, stiffness (including
      myositis ossiﬁcans), neurovascular deﬁcit (eg Volkmann’s contracture).
                                     PAEDIATRIC UPPER LIMB INJURIES: 1          723

Supracondylar humeral fractures

                                            45°

Fig. 15.20 Normal lateral view—the capitulum makes an angle of 45* with the
humeral shaft.

Fig. 15.21 Supracondylar fracture with >20* angulation and 750% displacement.
724    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric upper limb injuries: 2
      Lateral epicondylar epiphyseal injury
      Salter–Harris type II injury may follow a fall on outstretched hand. The
      elbow is swollen, with d movement and maximum tenderness on the
      lateral aspect. X-rays demonstrate the fracture, which may be displaced
      by the pull of the forearm extensors, requiring surgical reduction. Treat
      undisplaced fractures with a long arm back slab POP, collar and cuff at
      90*, analgesia and fracture clinic follow-up.
      Medial epicondylar epiphyseal injury
      Maximal tenderness is apparent on the medial side of the elbow. Check
      carefully for ulnar nerve damage. Refer immediately if the ulnar nerve is
      involved, or if the fracture is displaced. Treat undisplaced fractures with
      analgesia, collar and cuff at 90* under clothes (conﬁrm radial pulse is
      present) and fracture clinic follow-up.
      Radial head/neck fracture
      The radiocapitellar line is drawn down the axis of the proximal radius on
      the lateral view of the elbow and should bisect the capitellum. Failure to do
      so suggests occult radial neck fracture or radial head dislocation. Most of
      these fractures can be managed satisfactorily with analgesia, collar and cuff
      (some prefer a broad arm sling) and fracture clinic follow-up (b p.450).
      Refer to the orthopaedic surgeon if there is signiﬁcant angulation.
      Elbow injury without obvious fracture
      Treat elbow injuries where there is clinical suspicion of fracture, but
      none seen on X- ray, along the same lines as for an undisplaced fracture
      (analgesia, collar and cuff, and fracture clinic follow-up). This includes
      children who have d range of movement and whose X-rays show an
      elbow effusion (‘fat pad sign’)—see b p. 450.
      Subluxation of the radial head (‘pulled elbow’)
      A direct pull on the arm of a child aged 1–5 years may result in the radial
      head being pulled out of the annular ligament (‘nursemaid’s elbow’). The
      child then refuses to use the arm. If there is a characteristic history, there
      is no need to X-ray. The traditional reduction technique involves ﬂexing
      the elbow to 90*, then supinating the elbow fully. However, manipulating
      the elbow into full pronation may give a better reduction rate (www.
      bestbets.org.uk). A click is sometimes felt or heard during reduction.
      If full pronation fails, try full supination and leave for 10min. Allow the
      child to play and watch: he will usually use the arm again soon. If he does
      not, obtain X-rays and senior help. Repeat manipulation can be done
      once, but if that does not lead to a rapid improvement in function then
      place the arm in a sling, give analgesia and plan to review in 1–2 days.
      The elbow may reduce spontaneously or may need further manipulation.
      Rarely, repeated manipulation is unsuccessful until sedation is given. After
      successful manipulation advise the parents to avoid pulling the arm
      forcefully. A pulled elbow may recur up to about age 5 if the arm is pulled,
      but after that the child should have no long term problems with the
      elbow.
                                    PAEDIATRIC UPPER LIMB INJURIES: 2             725

Radius/ulna shaft fractures
Radius and ulna shaft fractures often cause signiﬁcant displacement or
angulation: provide IV analgesia, immobilize in a broad arm sling, obtain
X-rays and refer for manipulation under GA. Never accept an isolated
forearm shaft fracture without X-rays demonstrating the entire radius
and ulna, otherwise a Monteggia or Galeazzi fracture-dislocation may be
missed (b Forearm fractures and related injury, p.448).
Distal radial fracture (including Salter–Harris type II injuries)
A common fracture in all ages of children (and adults) after a fall on an
outstretched hand. The fracture results in localized tenderness and
variable swelling. Check carefully for a second injury (eg involving the
thumb or scaphoid). X-rays will demonstrate the fracture and allow
assessment of the need for MUA.
Moderate displacement or slight angulation may be accepted (particularly in
younger children): if in doubt, obtain a senior opinion.
Minimally displaced or undisplaced greenstick, buckle or torus fractures
commonly occur just proximal to the distal radial epiphysis. Treat with
analgesia, elevation, a backslab forearm POP (extend this above the elbow
in children <2 years or it will fall off) and arrange review and plaster
completion at 24hr. Children who present with discrete tenderness over
the distal radial growth plate, but without a fracture apparent on X-ray
should be treated identically to those with a radiological proven fracture—
presume a growth plate injury (sometimes a subperiosteal haematoma
can be seen on ultrasound). Beware osteomyelitis (b The limping child,
p.704), which can cause tenderness over the distal radius and be mistaken
for trauma.
Removable splints For co-operative children (usually >4 years old) with
torus/buckle fractures of the distal radius, an alternative option is to use
removable splints. Parents and children report better functioning and
fewer days off school. Splints should be retained until pain wears off (usually
<3 weeks) and follow-up is not required if pain settles as expected.
Scaphoid fracture
Despite being uncommon, particularly in younger children, seek clinical
evidence of scaphoid fracture in any child with wrist/forearm injury and
obtain scaphoid views if appropriate (b p.442). Treat radiologically
evident and suspected fractures as for adults as described in b Carpal
bone fractures and dislocations, p.442.
Metacarpal and phalangeal injuries
Treat these injuries along similar lines to those described for adults
(b Hand fractures and dislocations, p.436). Remember, however, that
children may not tolerate manipulation under LA: anaesthetic help may
be required.
726    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Paediatric lower limb injuries
      Hip fracture
      Children rarely sustain neck of femur fractures similar to those seen in
      adults. In the pre-adolescent child, trauma may precipitate a slipped upper
      femoral epiphysis (b The painful hip, p.706). Younger children who have
      been subjected to considerable violence may suffer a Salter–Harris type I
      injury to the proximal femoral epiphysis—carefully exclude other injuries
      and refer to the orthopaedic surgeon.
      Femoral shaft fracture
      May be spiral (the majority) or transverse, depending upon the mechanism
      of injury. Considerable energy is required to produce a femoral fracture:
      check for other injuries. Resuscitate as necessary with IV ﬂuids and
      provide nasal diamorphine (b p.281) or IV opioid analgesia (b p.280).
      Perform a femoral nerve block (as described on b p.304) to provide
      additional analgesia, using 0.2mL/kg of 0.5% plain bupivicaine (1mg/kg).
      Allow 20min for this to work, then apply skin traction. Gallows traction
      may be used on infants and children <2 years, but is best erected on the
      ward. A spiral fracture in a non-ambulatory child suggests child abuse—
      swelling is often not dramatic.
      Knee injuries
      Knee ligament injuries are rare in children compared with adults: suspect
      a fracture or epiphyseal injury instead. This is a reﬂection of the relative
      strengths of ligament and bone in the child. So, for example, an injury
      which might cause anterior cruciate ligament rupture in the adult will often
      produce avulsion of its tibial attachment in the child. This tibial plateau
      fracture will produce a haemarthrosis and will be apparent on the lateral
      X-ray. Provide analgesia and refer to the orthopaedic surgeon.
      Patella fractures
      Do not confuse a congenitally bipartite patella for a fracture. The small
      bony fragment in a bipartite patella lies superolaterally and has rounded
      edges.
      Patellar sleeve fractures are not uncommon in children and adolescents.
      These osteochondral fractures typically result from high impact jumping
      activities or sports. Suspect clinically if there is local pain and tenderness
      and an inability to actively extend the knee. Radiographs can be misleading
      as only a small bony fragment is avulsed, usually from the inferior pole, but
      a large part of the articular surface is removed with it, but is impossible
      to see on plain X-ray. Provide analgesia and splintage and refer to the
      orthopaedic team for MRI to conﬁrm the diagnosis ± ORIF.
      Patella dislocation
      This is seen relatively frequently in children and is treated in a similar way
      to that in adults (see b p.476). Examine the X-rays carefully as associated
      osteochondral ‘chip’ fractures of the undersurface of the patella occur
      relatively frequently in children.
                                     PAEDIATRIC LOWER LIMB INJURIES              727

Tibial shaft fracture
Treat most fractures as for adults: splintage, IV analgesia, and referral for
elevation and admission. Compound fractures require IV antibiotics and
wound surgery. Displaced or angulated fractures require MUA and POP;
undisplaced fractures respond to treatment with above knee non-WB
POP and subsequent mobilization using crutches.
Toddler’s fracture
Minor trauma in 1–4-year-olds may result in characteristic spiral undis-
placed distal tibial fractures. These may not be apparent on the initial
X-rays: localized warmth and tenderness with a history of trauma may
suggest the diagnosis in the otherwise wide differential of the limping
child (b p.704). If a fracture is visible on initial X-rays treat by rest in a
POP and arrange fracture clinic follow-up. If the diagnosis is made without
a visible fracture, treat in POP and review clinically and radiologically at
10 days: further X-rays may then demonstrate a long strip of periosteal
tibial new bone formation. Continue to treat according to symptoms.
Ankle injuries
Ankle ligament injuries are less common than in adults, but are treated
similarly (as are ankle fractures—b p.486). If there is no fracture apparent
on X-ray, but there is much tenderness over the distal tibial or ﬁbular
epiphysis, treat as a growth plate injury (undisplaced Salter–Harris type I
fracture) with BKPOP, crutches, elevation, analgesia and fracture clinic
follow-up.
Calcaneal and other foot injuries
See b Foot fractures and dislocations, p.488.
728    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Child abuse
      The boundaries of what deﬁnes acceptable behaviour and what constitutes
      child abuse are open to some debate and are certainly affected by historical
      and cultural factors. For example, corporal punishment, once considered
      normal and usual, is now unacceptable. The extremes of child abuse,
      however, are easily deﬁned.
      Types of child abuse
      • Physical abuse (NAI)—including bruises, fractures, wounds, and burns.
      • Sexual abuse.
      • Poisoning.
      • Suffocation.
      • Neglect or emotional abuse.
      • Fabricated and induced illness (previously known as ‘Munchausen
        syndrome by proxy’).
      Prevalence
      It is impossible to be sure how common child abuse is. It is generally
      agreed that it is much more prevalent than was previously believed.
      4% of children are brought to the attention of professional agencies for
      suspected abuse. It is believed that 80.1% of UK children suffer severe
      physical abuse each year and it has been estimated that 100–150 child
      deaths occur each year as a result of abuse by parents or carers.
      Aetiology
      Child abuse affects both boys and girls. The ﬁrst-born child is most
      frequently affected. Infants and young children are at most risk of serious
      injury or death, partly reﬂecting their physical vulnerability. The abuser is
      often a parent or cohabitant of a parent, more commonly male and may
      have suffered abuse themselves as a child. Sometimes the child may be
      targeted because they are unwanted (eg ‘she should have been a boy’).
      Whilst the abuser may be a young parent with unrealistic expectations and
      living in difﬁcult social circumstances (unemployment, drug abuse), often
      they do not conform to this standard description. Child abuse affects all
      levels of society. Clear links between domestic violence and physical abuse
      of children have been identiﬁed. Children whose parents have mental
      health problems may be more vulnerable to abuse and neglect.
      Role of the junior emergency department doctor
      Managing the child and family where there is suspected child abuse is an
      extremely delicate skill, requiring considerable tact and experience. The
      role of the junior doctor is to consider the possibility of child abuse and
      to involve a senior doctor at an early stage. Recent NICE guidance is avail-
      able at http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/12183/44872/44872.pdf
                                                           CHILD ABUSE        729

The suspicious history
Certain features should alert the doctor to the possibility of child abuse:
• Injuries inconsistent with the history given.
• Injuries inappropriate for developmental age (eg a baby aged <3 months
  ‘rolled off a bed’).
• Changing history of injury, or vague history, lacking vivid details.
• Delay in seeking medical attention.
• Abnormal parental attitudes (eg apparent lack of concern for child).
• Frequent ED attendances.
• Occasionally, children provide an account of abuse.
730    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Presentation of child abuse: 1
      Physical child abuse is commonly referred to as NAI. Children may present
      with a variety of injuries, which may occur singly or in combination.
      Bruising
      Children naturally sustain bruises during minor incidents as part of
      ‘growing up’. Bruising over the knees and shins is a normal ﬁnding in chil-
      dren, particularly toddlers, who are also prone to sustaining injuries to
      their foreheads and chins as a result of falls. Older children frequently
      sustain bruises over the lateral aspect of their elbows and hips, during
      normal play and sport activities. As well as considering the possibility
      of NAI, remember that bruising may occur as part of an unusual patho-
      logical disease process (eg Henoch–Schönlein purpura, haemophilia, ITP,
      leukaemia, and other causes of thrombocytopenia). A Mongolian blue spot
      is an innocuous congenital ﬁnding on the lower back of some young chil-
      dren (especially non-Caucasians), which may be confused with bruising.
      The following features should prompt consideration of NAI:
      • Bruising in unusual sites (eg medial aspect of upper arms or thighs).
      • Multiple bruising of different ages (very difﬁcult for the non-expert to
        judge) at less common sites.
      • Uncommon injuries bilaterally.
      • Finger ‘imprinting’ (eg grip complexes around upper limbs or slap
        marks).
      • Imprints or marks from other objects (eg belt, stick).
      • Human bite marks (probably adult if canines >3cm apart: ensure
        photographs next to a ruler are planned after admission).
      • Petechiae on the face may reﬂect smothering and asphyxiation (it
        has been previously suggested that 2–10% of SIDS may have been
        smothered), but remember that petechiae also occur with forceful
        coughing or vomiting.
      Wounds and burns
      Children commonly sustain wounds and burns unintentionally. However,
      deliberately inﬂicted burns are found in a signiﬁcant proportion of physically
      abused children.
      The following suggest the possibility of NAI:
      • Torn frenulum of upper lip (can also reﬂect a ‘normal’ toddler injury).
      • Perineal wounds and burns (see sexual abuse b p.732).
      • Small, deep circular burns with raised edges suggest cigarette burns.
      • Hand, lower limb, and buttock burns may follow forced immersion in
        bath water that is too hot. These burns tend to be of the ‘stocking and
        glove’ type, without higher splash burns. Parts of the buttocks may be
        spared, where skin has been in contact with the bath, not the water.
                                   PRESENTATION OF CHILD ABUSE: 1               731

Head injuries
Most head injuries result from unintentional incidents (‘accidents’). In
infants, they often result from the parent or carer dropping the child. The
fractures caused by this tend to be single, linear, and involve the parietal
bone.
Consider NAI if the following occur:
• Retinal haemorrhages (characteristic, but not diagnostic of shaking—
  they may also rarely be seen in CO poisoning, for example). In the
  context of NAI, retinal haemorrhages are often associated with subdural
  haematomas.
• Occipital skull fracture.
• Multiple, wide or comminuted fractures.
• Subdural haematoma in an infant or toddler.
Natural progression of bruises
Swelling and tenderness of bruising suggests relatively recent origin,
but this is not very reliable. Accurate assessment of the age of bruising
according to its colour is not possible, except that a yellow bruise is
almost certainly >18hr old. Oft-quoted natural temporal progression of
colour changes of bruising allows only a guess at the age of a bruise—
avoid being drawn on this issue, which may have considerable legal
implications. Instead, record the ﬁndings as accurately as possible: describe
the colour, size, and distribution of the bruising. Usually a child suspected
of having suffered physical abuse will also be examined by a relevant
expert, such as a paediatrician and/or police surgeon (clinical forensic
physician).
732    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Presentation of child abuse: 2
      Fractures
      Certain fractures are very common in children. Pay attention to the
      history of injury and whether or not it appears to be consistent with the
      fracture(s) sustained. Multiple fractures of different ages (especially if
      previously undiagnosed and/or not brought to medical attention) should
      arouse suspicion of NAI. To help assess the approximate age of a bony
      injury, see Table 15.14.

      Table 15.14 Natural progression of fractures
      Presence of soft tissue swelling                           0–10 days
      Periosteal new bone formation                             10–14 days
      Loss of deﬁnition of the fracture line                    14–21 days
      Callus formaton                                           14–42 days
      Remodelling                                                  81 year

      Remember that times vary according to the age of the child.
      Consider NAI in the following fractures
      • Multiple fractures of different ages.
      • Rib and spinal fractures.
      • Fractures in infants who are not independently mobile.
      • Long bone fractures in children <3 years old.
      • Epiphyseal separation and metaphyseal ‘chip’ fractures of the knee, wrist,
        elbow, and ankle. These Salter–Harris I and II injuries are associated
        with traction, rotation, and shaking.
      A few rare bone diseases may mimic NAI
      • Osteogenesis imperfecta (blue sclerae, dental abnormalities and brittle
        bones—autosomal dominant).
      • Pathological fractures (through multiple cystic bone lesions).
      • Rickets (enlarged, cupped epiphyses, craniotabes, ‘bow legs’).
      • Copper deﬁciency (eg Menkes’ kinky hair syndrome).
      Neglect and emotional abuse
      There will be an element of emotional abuse as part of other forms of
      abuse, which may be manifest in the child in a variety of ways: behavioural
      problems, sleep disturbance, soiling, nocturnal enuresis. The neglected
      child may be dirty and unkempt, fail to thrive, and/or fall below the 3rd
      centile for height and weight. Occasionally, nutritional deﬁciencies may
      be extreme (eg rickets). Developmental milestones are often delayed
      (and may even regress).
      Note the apparent attitudes of the parents/carers towards their child
      (eg critical and hostile or remote and unconcerned) and the child’s attitude
      to the parents/carers (if in doubt as to whether this seems appropriate,
      ask an experienced nurse).
                                   PRESENTATION OF CHILD ABUSE: 2               733

Sexual abuse
This may affect boys or girls and takes many forms, ranging from exposure
to indecent acts through to rape. The abuser is often a male relative or
carer who is well known to the child. The child may present in a variety
of ways:
• Injury to the genitalia or anus.
• Perineal pain, discharge, or bleeding.
• Behavioural disturbance, enuresis, encopresis.
• Inappropriate sexual behaviour.
• The child may allege sexual abuse.
• Sexually transmitted disease (including anogenital warts).
• Pregnancy.
Accurately record statements made by the child ‘word for word’ using
quotation marks. Do not pursue a genital examination, but involve a
senior doctor at an early stage, who may wish to examine the genitalia
using a colposcope, in collaboration with a police surgeon (clinical forensic
physician). In the context of an allegation of recent sexual assault, the
collection of forensic samples for DNA analysis is likely to be required.
Fabricated or induced illness (previously known as Munchausen
syndrome by proxy)
A parent/carer may invent a history of illness in a child and fabricate
physical signs to substantiate it. The history often involves one or more of
the following: apnoeic episodes, ﬁts, bowel disturbances, rashes, allergies,
or fevers. Classically, the deceiver is the mother. The child may be made
ill by administering drugs or poisons. If suspected, do not confront the
deceiver, but take blood and urine samples for a toxicology screen and
refer to the paediatric team.
Bear in mind that some parents may be naturally very anxious and may
exaggerate symptoms, rather than deliberately fabricate them.
734    CHAPTER 15 Paediatric emergencies

      Management of child abuse
      Role of the junior emergency department doctor
      The junior ED doctor needs to be vigilant in considering abuse when
      initially assessing and treating children. Any suspicion of child abuse should
      prompt involvement of an expert senior doctor (paediatrician or ED
      consultant). In every hospital system there will be a designated doctor
      for child protection who should be available for advice. He or she will
      examine the child and arrange hospital admission for further investigations
      (eg skeletal survey) as necessary. Social Services and the police may need
      to be involved. The child may require examination by a police surgeon
      (clinical forensic physician) and samples/photographs obtained. Follow
      local procedures.
      The chief consideration is the treatment and protection of the child, so
      do not delay treatment of painful or apparently life-threatening problems,
      whilst awaiting an ‘expert’. Ensure that all documentation is legible and
      meticulous. Remember that if child abuse is considered likely, siblings may
      also be at risk.
      UK law: The Children Act 1989
      This act replaced previous statutes. Central to the Act is the concept that
      the welfare of the child is paramount. In the short term, the 1989 Children
      Act may be used to obtain orders to protect children. A variety of orders
      may be obtained:
      Police Protection Order
      A police ofﬁcer has legal powers to take any child into ‘police protection’
      for up to 72hr if deemed necessary for his/her own protection. This order
      may be used to prevent a child being taken away from the ED by a parent
      or guardian against medical advice.
      Emergency Protection Order
      This has replaced the ‘Place of Safety Order’. A court order valid for up
      to 8 days may be obtained if the child is believed to be at signiﬁcant risk of
      harm. Such an order would normally be requested by a social worker.
      Child Assessment Order
      This court order may be obtained in order to allow an assessment to be
      performed of a child who appears to be at risk of injury.
      Care Order
      This transfers the care of a child from the parent(s) to the local authority
      Social Services department. If a care order is in force, matters requiring
      parental consent should be referred to the social worker (not the foster
      carer).
      Residence Order
      This court order deﬁnes where a child should live and who has parental
      responsibility.
                                       MANAGEMENT OF CHILD ABUSE                735

Child Protection Plan (replaces the ‘Child Protection
Register’)
This register is kept by the social services. It contains a list of names of
those children considered to be at current risk of harm. ED staff should be
aware of how to access Child Protection Register information. Previous
hospital case notes are also very useful in this respect. When searching for
previous records, remember that many children may be known by several
surnames.
Child protection conferences
A conference may be called by Social Services if it is suspected that a child
has been abused. Child protection conferences should be held promptly
and aim to deﬁne a protection plan for the future protection of the child
and family. Unlike the criminal courts, where the onus is on the prosecution
to prove abuse ‘beyond reasonable doubt’, child protection conferences
will determine whether a child is deemed to be at risk of signiﬁcant harm
and whether a protection plan is required. Case conferences consist of a
number of individuals, including: chairman (usually a senior member of the
Social Services department), hospital consultant, GP, social worker, police,
health visitor, teacher, education welfare ofﬁcer, child abuse advisor, local
authority solicitor. Parents are always invited and older children may also
attend.
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                             737

           Index

                                 newborn 642–5                angioplasty for MI 76
A                                paediatric 652–5             anion gap 99
A2 pulley injury 440           advanced trauma life           ankle
abbreviations ix–xv                support (ATLS) 321           fractures 486
abdominal aortic aneurysm,     aggression 608, 610              injuries 484
    ruptured 530               AIDS and HIV 242–5                 in children 727
abdominal injury,              airway management 48             nerve blocks 306–7
    children 714                 burns 390, 392, 394–5          Ottawa rules 484–5
abdominal mass,                  cardiac arrest 50              sprains 487
    children 699                 children 646, 654            ankylosing spondylitis 497
abdominal pain 504               foreign body 648             anorectal problems 518
  analgesia 280                  nasopharyngeal               anthrax 233, 627
  in cancer 506                      airway 325               anti-D immunoglobulin 582
  in children 698                newborn 642                  antibiotics
  in pregnancy 590               spinal injury 380              abscess 526
abdominal trauma 348, 350        surgical 326–7                 bites 411, 414
abortion 584                   airway obstruction 45,           in compound fractures 422
abruptio placentae 588, 594        112, 324                     and oral contraception 569
abscess 526                      children 677                   pneumonia 111, 687
  anorectal 519                alcohol (ethanol)                prophylaxis 411
  Bartholin’s 565                absorption, metabolism,      anticoagulants 170
  breast 599                         and elimination 622      antidotes 186–7
  peritonsillar 554              abuse 622                    antipsychotic drugs 619
  pilonidal 518                  intoxication 202, 623        aortic aneurysm, abdominal,
  retropharyngeal 555            and police 30                    ruptured 530
Acanthamoeba keratitis 539       withdrawal 624               aortic dissection 92
ACE inhibitor poisoning 199    alcohol-related brain          aortic injury 344
acetabular fractures 468           injury 625                 apophysitis, traction 708
acetaminophen see              alteplase 77                   appendicitis 507
    paracetamol                Amanita phalloides 212           children 699
acetylcysteine 190–2           amaurosis fugax 540              epiploic 517
Achilles tendon injuries 482   ambulance crew 12                pregnancy 591
acid-base nomogram             Ambulance Incident             arc (welder’s) eye 538
    inside front cover             Ofﬁcer 39                  arterial blood gases 98
acidosis                       aminophylline 106                diagram inside front cover
  lactic 99                      in children 679              arthritis 494
  metabolic 99                 amiodarone 86                    in children 705
acromio-clavicular joint       amniotic ﬂuid                    septic 495, 705
    injury 458                     embolism 594               aspiration, pulmonary 112,
activated charcoal 185         amphetamine 215, 626               338
activated partial              amputation 422, 435            aspirin (salicylate) 274
    thromboplastin               toes 490                       poisoning 189
    time xviii, 167            anaesthesia                    asthma
acute confusional state 134      general 310, 316               acute 104–7
Addisonian crisis 155            local 282                      cardiac arrest 107
adenosine, supraventricular      topical 288                    children 678–81
    tachycardia 88               see also local anaesthesia   asystole 51
adhesive capsulitis 461        anal ﬁssure 518                atracurium 316
adrenaline (epinephrine)       analgesia 274–281              atrial ﬁbrillation 89
  anaphylaxis 44                 children 275–6, 280–1,       atrial ﬂutter 89
  bradycardia 82–3                   632, 713                 atrioventricular block 80
  cardiac arrest 53            anaphylaxis 42, 44             atropine 82, 654
  children 650–2                 in children 650–1              as antidote 186
  local anaesthesia 285        angina 67                        poisoning 194
  newborn 644                    Prinzmetal’s (variant) 69    attenders
advanced life support            unstable 68                    inappropriate 16
  adult 52–3                   angio-oedema 42                  regular 17
738    INDEX

      Australian Mental Health       Boerhaave’s syndrome 333         carbon monoxide
          Triage Scale 612           Bohler’s angle 488                   poisoning 208, 394–5
      Autopulse 51                   bombs (blast injuries) 389       carboxyhaemoglobin 70,
      avian ﬂu 33, 252               bone anatomy 421                     208, 394–5
      aviator’s astragalus 498       Bordetella pertussis, whooping   cardiac arrest 46–55
                                         cough 684                      algorithms 47, 52
                                     botulism 143, 237                  asthma 107
      B                              boutonnière deformity 433,         children 646–7, 652–5
      back pain 492                      440, 498                       drugs 50, 644, 654
      bacterial tracheitis,          bowel problems 511–7               hyperkalaemic 163
           children 677              boxer’s fracture 498               newborn 644
      bad news, breaking 24          brachial plexus blocks 298         pregnancy 596
      balanitis 702                  bradycardia 80                     reversible causes 51
      Bankart lesion 498              algorithm 83                    cardiac arrhythmias 80–89
      barbiturate poisoning 197       children 656                      in children 656
      barotrauma 260–3, 551          brain injury,                      in poisoning 183
      Bartholin’s abscess 565            alcohol-related 625          cardiac markers 71
      Barton’s fracture 446          breast                           cardiac pacing 53, 82
      basic life support 48           abscess 527, 599                cardiac tamponade 342
        newborn 642–4                 swelling, babies 660            cardiogenic pulmonary
        paediatric 646–7             breastfeeding and                    oedema 100
      BASICS 34                          drugs 576                    cardiogenic shock 60, 77
      batteries, button 213          breathlessness                   cardiopulmonary
      Bazett’s formula (QTc) 65          (dyspnoea) 96                    resuscitation
      Beck’s triad 342               British Association for            adult 46–53
      bee stings 416                     Immediate Care                 children 646–7, 652–5
      Bell’s palsy 556                   (BASICS) 34                    mechanical 51
      Bennett’s fracture 439         bronchiolitis 682                  newborn 644
      benzodiazepine poisoning 196   bronchus, ruptured 336           cardioversion,
      bereavement 24                 Brown-Séquard                        synchronised 86
      berry poisoning 212                syndrome 383                 carpal tunnel syndrome 445
      beta-blocker poisoning 198     Brugada syndrome 65              casts 424
      biceps injury 452, 459         bruises 403                      catheterization, male 521
      Bier’s block 290                child abuse 728–31              cauda equina syndrome 493
      biliary tract problems 510     bumper fractures 498             CBRN incidents (chemical/
      bilious vomiting 661           bupivacaine 283                      biological/radiological/
      birth, emergency               burns 390–3, 396–7                   nuclear) 39, 210
           delivery 578               airway, from cocaine 555        cellulitis 234, 413, 453, 528
      bites 414–7                     and child abuse 397               ear canal 550
        dogs 415                      children 715                      orbital 542
        human 416                     inhalation injury 394           cement burns 397
        infection 413–5              BURP manoeuvre 314               central cord syndrome 383
        insects 416                  bursitis 427                     central retinal artery
        reverse ﬁght bites            infrapatellar 479                   occlusion 540
             415–16, 435             button batteries 213             central retinal vein
        snake bites 417                                                   occlusion 540
        and stings 416                                                central venous access 56
        tetanus 410                  C                                cephalhaematoma 660
        ticks 231, 416               Caesarian section 597            cerebral haemorrhage 144
      bladder injury 352             CAGE questionnaire 622           cerebral infarction 144
      blast injuries 389             calcaneal fracture 488           cerebral venous
      bleeding disorders 166         calciﬁc tendonitis 461               thrombosis 133
      blepharitis 543                calcium antagonist               cervical cancer 566, 574
      blindness, sudden 540               poisoning 198               cervical cord syndrome,
      blood pressure, normal,        calculous disease 557                central 383
           children 633              calf                             cervical disc herniation 463
      blood transfusion 172            injuries 482                   cervical erosion 574
        reactions 175                  squeeze test 482–3             cervical spine control 320,
      blow-out fracture 374          cancer and abdominal                 712
      BMA Counselling Service             pain 506                    chalazion 543
           for Doctors 15            capacity, deﬁning 629            chance fracture 498
      body packers 217               carbamate insecticides 206       charcoal, activated 185
                                                                                INDEX         739

CHEMDATA 36                   collateral ligament injuries
chemical burns 397              knee 475, 478
                                                             D
  of eyes 538                   thumb 438, 440               dacrocystitis 543
chemical incidents 36,        Colles fracture 444, 499       dantrolene 183, 214, 265
    37, 210                   colovaginal ﬁstulae 566        dashboard dislocation 499
  decontamination 211         coma 136, 138                  De Quervain’s
  roadside 36                   alcohol overdose 623             tenosynovitis 447
chest compression 49            Glasgow Coma                 death 24–27
  children 646                      Scale 360–1              decompression illness 260
  newborn 644                     children 717               decontamination
chest drain insertion 115,      hypoglycaemia 151              chemical 211
    336–7                     compartment                      radiation incidents 211, 268
chest injury 328–344              syndrome 398               deep venous
  analgesia 279               compound fractures 422             thrombosis 118
  children 714                compulsory                       in IV drug users 627
  penetrating 340, 342            hospitalisation 628          in pregnancy 593
chest pain 66                 concussion 368                 deﬁbrillation 50
  assessment units 71         confusional state 134            children 652–3
  atypical 67                 conjunctival FB 538            deﬁbrillator, implantable 82
  differential diagnosis 66   conjunctivitis 543             dehydration 152, 227, 681
  pericarditis 78               neonatal 660                 deliberate self-harm 612
  sickle cell disease 176     consent 28                     delirium 134, 603
chickenpox 240                contact lens problems 539      delirium tremens 624
child abuse 728–35            contraceptive problems 568     delivery, emergency 578
  fractures 732               convulsions 148–9              delusion 603
child protection                children 688                 dementia 135
  plan 735                      poisoning 183                dengue fever 248
Children Act (1989) 734       COPD 108                       dental anaesthesia 302
chlorine poisoning 209        coping as a junior             dental anatomy 558
choking 45, 648                   doctor 14                  dental emergencies 558
cholangitis, ascending 510    corneal trauma 538               see also teeth
cholecystitis 510             coronary syndromes,            dento-alveolar
cholesteatoma 551                 acute 68                       fractures 372
Christmas disease 169         Coroner 26, 31                 depression 616
chronic obstructive           corpus luteum cyst 572, 587    dermatitis
    pulmonary disease 108     cortical blindness 717             herpetiformis 672
chronic renal failure 160     cot death 658                  dermatomes 386–7
ciguatera ﬁsh poisoning 229   counselling service 15         detention, compulsory 628
clavicle fracture 458         court, going to 31             diabetes mellitus 152
  children 722                cranial arteritis 132, 541       hypoglycaemia 150
clay-shoveller’s              cricoid pressure 312–5           pregnancy 593
    fracture 499              cricothyroidotomy 326–7        diabetic ketoacidosis 152
clomethiazole                 Crohn’s disease 517              children 691
    poisoning 196             croup 676                      diagnostic peritoneal
Clothier report 620           cruciate ligaments 474, 478        lavage 347
clozapine 619                 crush syndrome 398             dialysis problems 160–1
CN gas 209                    crushed ﬁngers 435             diamorphine 276
co-codamol 274                crying babies 661                nasal 281
co-dydramol 274               CS gas 209                     diaphragm, ruptured 333
coagulation cascade 169       CT scan                        diarrhoea 226
coagulation disorders 166       coma 138                     diazepam
cocaine 215, 626                headache 127–8                 overdose 196
  pharyngeal burns 555          head injury 362                status epilepticus 149
coccyx fractures 469            stroke 145                       children 690
cochlear implants 549           trauma 322, 348              diclofenac 275
codeine 276                     ureteric colic 525           digital nerve block 294–5
cognitive assessment 607      CURB-65 score 111              digital nerve injury 432, 434
cold injury 257               Cushing response 354           digoxin poisoning 199
colitis                       cut down, venous 639           diphtheria 676
  ischaemic 515               cyanide poisoning 207, 395     discharge from ED 2, 8
  ulcerative 517              cystic ﬁbrosis 685               against advice 29
collapse 140                  cystitis 158                     elderly patient 20
740    INDEX

      disclosure in public             tachyarrythmias 87–9        external jugular vein 57
           interest 30                 tricyclic antidepressant    eye 533
      dislike of a patient 18              poisoning 194–5          burns 538
      dislocations 423               eclampsia 592                  examination 534
        ankle 486                    ecstasy 214, 626               foreign bodies 537
        children 718                   liquid 215                   injury 536
        elbow 449, 451               ectopic pregnancy 586          problems and HIV 244
        ﬁnger 436                    eczema 662                    eye signs
        hip 468                      edrophonium test 142           head injury 360
        knee 477                     elbow                          in poisoning 182
        patella 476                    fat-pad sign 450            eyebrow wounds 464
           children 726                injuries 450                eyelid wounds 464
        shoulder 454–7                   children 724              eyelids, superglued 538
        thumb 438                      problems, soft
        toes 490                           tissue 452–3
        wrist 442, 448                 pulled 724                  F
      disseminated intravascular     elderly patient,              fabricated illness 620, 733
           coagulation 169, 592          discharge 20              facial burns 394–6
      diverticular disease 516       electrical injuries 266       facial fractures 370–7
      diving emergencies 260–3       emesis, induced 185           facial injury 370, 464
      documentation see notes        EMLA cream 288                facial nerve palsy 556
      dog bites 415                  emotional abuse 732           facial wounds 464
      dressings 412                  endocarditis 740              factitious disorder 621
        burns 396                    endometriosis 572               in health care
      Dressler’s syndrome 79         enﬂurane 317                        workers 620
      driving 30, 535                enteric fever 248             fainting 140
      drowning 258                   Entonox® 278–9                FAST scan (focused
        children 715                 environmental                     assessment with
      drug abuse                         emergencies 253               sonography for
        complications 627            epicondylitis 452                 trauma) 346
        illicit drugs 214            epididymitis 522              fatal accident inquiry 31
        withdrawal 627               epididymo-orchitis 701        febrile child 663
      drugs                          epiglottitis 677              febrile convulsions 688
        anaesthetic 316              epilepsy 148, 688             feeding difﬁculties,
        doses in children 633, 644     see also seizures               babies 661
        interactions with            epinephrine see adrenaline    femoral neck, fracture 470
             OCP 569                 epiphyseal injury             femoral nerve block 304–5
        newborn doses 644, 655         children 718                femoral shaft
        psychiatric, complications     Salter-Harris                 fracture 472
             of 619                        classiﬁcation 719           children 726
        see also poisoning           epiphysis, slipped upper      femoral vein
      dry socket pain 561                femoral 706                 children 639
      Dupuytren’s fracture 499       epiploic appendagitis 517       venous access
      dyspnoea 96                    episcleritis 543                    56–7
      dystonic reaction 619          episiotomy 580                fentanyl 276, 281
                                     epistaxis 552                 fetal injury 594
                                     ergotamine 130                ﬁbula, fractures 480
      E                              erysipelas 528                ﬁeld block 289
      ear                            erythema                      ﬁght bites, reverse 415–6
       examination 548, 674            chronicum migrans 673       ﬁnger pad amputations 435
       nerve blocks 300–1              marginatum 672              ﬁngers
       problems 546–551                multiforme 672                crushed ﬁngers 435
       wounds 464                      nodosum 672                   digital nerve block 294–5
      earache 550                      toxicum, infants 662          dislocations 436
      Ebola fever 250                ESR xviii                       fractures 456–7, 725
      ECG 64                         Essex Lopresti fracture 499   ﬁshhooks, removal of 406
       bradyarrhythmias 81           ethanol see alcohol           ﬁsh bones in pharynx 547
       diagram inside back cover     ethyl chloride 288            ﬁsh poisoning 229
       hyperkalaemia 162             ethylene glycol               ﬁsh spine stings 416
       hypothermia 255                   poisoning 203             ﬁts see convulsions; seizures
       myocardial infarction         etomidate 316                 ﬂail segment 332
           72–5                      extensor tendon               ﬂeas 230
       pericarditis 78                   injury 432, 434           ﬂexor tendon injury 432–4
                                                                                 INDEX         741

ﬂumazenil 196, 309              glue snifﬁng 626                handover of patients 9
follow-up arrangements 5        golfer’s elbow 452              hangman’s fracture 499
food poisoning 226–9            gonorrhoea 238                  Hawkin’s impingement
foot                            gout, acute 496                     test 460
  dislocations 488              gout bursitis 453               Hazchem board 36, 37
  fractures 488                 GPs, liaising with 5, 10        head injury 354–368
  soft tissue problems 491      Graves’ disease 156               analgesia 279
forearm injuries 448, 725       gravidity 576                     and child abuse 731
forehead, nerve blocks 300      grease gun injuries 435           children 714, 716
foreign bodies                  groin lumps 700                   examination 360
  ear 546                       GTN intravenous                   Glasgow Coma
  eye 537–8                         infusion 68                       Scale 360–1
  foot 491                      Guillain-Barré                    history 358
  ingested 213, 547                 syndrome 142                  imaging 362–3
  inhaled 112, 547, 648, 677    gunshot injuries 30, 388          management 364
  nose 213, 546                 gynaecological                    minor 366
  rectal 519                        problems 564–575              monitoring 356–7
  under ﬁngernail 435                                             risks of haematoma 363
  vaginal 567                                                     triage 356
  wounds 405                    H                               headache 126–133
foreskin problems 523, 702      haemarthrosis, knee 478           analgesic 133
fractures                       haematemesis 122                  cluster 132
  and child abuse 732           haematoma                         sudden severe 128
  eponymous 498–502              block 289                        tension 132
  see also speciﬁc fractures     extradural 365                 hearing 548
fragmentation injuries 389       intracranial 365               heart block 80–81
frontal sinus, fractures 374     risks, after head injury 363   heart rates
frostbite 257                    soft tissue 426                  inside back cover
fundoscopy 535                   subdural 365                     normal, children 633
funny turns 689                  subungual 435                  heat illness 264
furunculosis of ear 550         haematuria, children 695        heat stroke 265
                                haemodialysis problems          helicopters 36
                                    161                         Henoch-Schönlein
G                               haemolytic uraemic                  purpura 664
Galeazzi fracture 448, 499          syndrome 694                hepatitis 220, 239, 415
gallstones 510                  haemophilia 166, 168            hernia 161, 512, 698, 700–1
  in pregnancy 591              Haemophilus inﬂuenzae 636       heroin 188, 217, 233,
gamekeeper’s thumb 438,         haemoptysis 94                      276, 627
    440, 499                    haemorrhage                     herpes simplex 240, 565
gammahydroxybutyrate             antepartum 588                 herpes zoster 240
    (GHB, GBH) 215               and anticoagulants 170         Hib vaccine 636
Garden classiﬁcation 471         cerebral 144                   high pressure injection
gas gangrene 237                 lower GI 124                       injuries 435
gastric lavage 184               post-partum 598                Hill-Sachs lesion 500
gastroenteritis 226, 228         subarachnoid 128               hip
gastrointestinal bleeding        tooth extraction 561             dislocations 468
  lower 124                      upper GI 122                     fractures 468, 470
  upper 122                      vitreous 541                       in children 726
General Medical Council 30      haemorrhoids 518                  hip pain in children 706
generalized weakness 142        haemostasis 167                 HIV 242–5
genital injury 570, 733         haemothorax 335                 horse rider’s knee 500
genital ulcers/sores 238        hallucinations 603              hospitalization,
german measles 223              haloperidol 611                     compulsory 628
gestational trophoblastic       halothane 317                   Hume fractures 449, 500
    disease 588                 hamate fracture 443             humerus
GHB 215                         hand                              fractures 459
giant cell arteritis 132, 541    anatomy 430                        children 722
glandular fever (infectious      arthritis 496                  Hunt and Hess scale,
    mononucleosis) 241           crushed ﬁngers 435                 subarachnoid
Glasgow Coma Scale 360–1         infections 413, 441                haemorrhage 129
  children 717                   injuries 430, 432              Hutchinson fracture 500
glaucoma 542                     wounds 413, 434                hydatid of Morgagni, torsion
glue (for wounds) 406           hand hygiene 32                     of 701
742       INDEX

      hydrocarbons 112, 205         immobilization,                 intra-hospital transfers 22
      hydrocoele 700                    spinal 380–1                intracranial haematoma 365
      hydroﬂuoric acid              immunization 636                intracranial pressure 354–5
         burns 397                  immunoglobulin,                 Intralipid in
      hyperbaric                        anti-D 582, 595                  poisoning 187, 284
       chambers 261                 impetigo 235, 662                  LA toxicity 284
       oxygen 208, 395              impingement syndromes           intraocular pressure 535
      hyperglycaemic crises 152         in shoulder 460             intraosseous infusion 640–1
      hyperkalaemia 162             impingement test 460            intrauterine contraceptive
       renal failure 160, 694       inappropriate attenders 16           device 569
      hypernatraemia 154            incubation periods of           intravenous ﬂuids
      hyperosmolar                      infectious diseases 220        children 640
         hyperglycaemic state 152   induced illness 620, 733           trauma 340
      hypertension 90               infantile spasm 688             intubation 312–5
       malignant 133                infection                          difﬁcult 314
       in pregnancy 91, 592           bites 413–15                     failed intubation drill 315
       in renal failure 160, 694      cellulitis 528                intussusception 699
      hyperthermia 183, 264           control and prevention 32     ipratropium bromide, in
      hypertrophic                    dental 561                         asthma 679, 680
         cardiomyopathy 141           pelvic 566, 573               iritis, acute 542
       ECG 141                        wounds 235, 413               iron poisoning 201
      hyperventilation 97             see also abscess              irradiated patient 268–9
      hypoglycaemia 150–1           infections                      irritable bowel
       alcohol-induced 623            staphylococcal 235                 syndrome 517
       coma 136, 138                  streptococcal 234, 528        irritable hip, children 706
       newborn 644                  infectious diseases 33, 219     ischaemic colitis 515
       sulphonylurea                  childhood 222                 ischaemic limb 531
           poisoning 197              duration of infectivity 220   isoﬂurane 317
      hypokalaemia 164                imported 246                  ISS (injury severity
      hyponatraemia 154               incubation periods 220             score) 323
      hypotension                     notiﬁable 221                 IUCD 569
       poisoning 183                  tropical diseases 246         IVU in renal trauma 351
       see shock 60–1               infectious
      hypothermia 254–6                 mononucleosis 241
       bleeding disorders 166       infestations 230                J
       blood transfusion 174        inﬂuenza
                                      pandemic 33, 252              jaundice
       and drowning 258                                               hepatitis 239
       ECG 255                      infraorbital nerve block 302
                                    infrapatellar bursitis 479        neonatal 660
       in poisoning 183                                               obstructive 510
       rewarming methods 256        inguinal swellings
                                        children 700                jaw thrust manoeuvre 325
      hypovolaemic shock 60                                         Jefferson fracture 500
       aortic aneurysm 530          inhalation injury 394
                                      children 715                  jellyﬁsh stings 416
       burns 390                                                    Johansson-Larsen’s
       GI bleed 122, 124            inhalational
                                        anaesthetics 317                 disease 708
       pregnancy 582–9                                              joint aspiration 494
       transfusion 172              injury prevention 711
                                    injury severity                 Jones fracture 489, 500
       trauma 320                                                   jugular vein 56–8
                                        score (ISS) 323
                                    inquest 31                        children 639
                                    INR xviii, 167, 170             junior doctor, coping as 14
      I                             insect bites 416
      ice 428                       insecticide poisoning 206
      ice skater’s fracture 500     insulin overdose 151            K
      idiopathic thrombocytopenic   insulin therapy in              Kawasaki disease 672
           purpura 664                  poisoning 187               Kemler plate 36
      iliac fossa mass 507          intercostal (chest) drain       Kernig’s sign 127
      imaging                           insertion 115, 336–7        ketamine 278, 316
         children 720               intercostal nerve block 303      children 715
         head injury 362–3          internal jugular vein 57–8      ketoacidosis
         spine and spinal           interview, psychiatric 604       alcoholic 624
             cord 384, 482          intestinal obstruction 512,      children 691
         see also CT; X-ray             591                          diabetic 152
      immersion foot 257              in pregnancy 591              ketorolac 275
                                                                               INDEX         743

knee                           locked knee 479                menstrual cycle and
 children 726                  long bone anatomy 421              pain 572
 injuries 474–8                lorazepam 611                  Mental Capacity Act 29,
 problems 479                  low back pain 492                  615, 629
Kocher’s method, shoulder      lower GI tract bleeding 124    mental health, triage 612
   dislocation 454             LSD 215                        mental health
Kohler’s disease 708           Lucas CPR device 51                legislation 615, 628–9
Korsakoff’s psychosis 625      lumbar puncture,               mental nerve block 302
                                   children 670               mental state
                               lunate dislocation 442             examination 606
L                              Lund and Browder charts        mephedrone 215, 626
labour 578                         (for burns) 391            mesenteric ischaemia 514
lactic acidosis 99             luxatio erecta 457, 500        metabolic acidosis 99
Langer’s lines 464–5           Lyme disease 231               metabolic diseases 661
laryngospasm 315                                              metacarpal fractures 436–7
laryngotracheobronchitis 676                                   children 725
Lassa fever 250                M                              metacarpophalangeal
Le Fort fractures 372–3, 500   magnesium                          joint 438
learning difﬁculties 21         arrhythmias 53, 85, 87        metatarsal fractures 489
legal aspects 28–31               children 654, 656           methanol poisoning 202
Legg-Calvé-Perthes’             asthma 106                    methedrone 215
     disease 706–7                children 679, 680           methicillin resistant Staph.
leptospirosis 239               deﬁciency 164                     aureus 235
leukaemia, acute 664            eclampsia 149, 592            methionine 191–2
levonorgestrel 568              normal range xvii             midazolam
lice 230                       Maisonneuve injury 480, 501     sedation 308
lidocaine 283                  major incidents 38              status epilepticus 149,
lidocaine gel 288               chemical 36, 37, 210                655, 688, 690
life support, advanced 52–3     radiation 268                 migraine 130
   newborn 642–5               malar fractures 374            Milch method, shoulder
   paediatric 652–5            malaria 247                        dislocation 455
   trauma (ATLS) 321           Malgaigne’s fracture 501       milestones, paediatric 637
life support, basic 46–9       malingering 620                milia 662
   newborn 643                 mallet ﬁnger 433, 436,         Mini-Mental State
   paediatric 646–7               440, 501                        Examination 607
lightning 266                  mandibular injuries 376–7      miscarriage (abortion) 584
lignocaine see lidocaine       mania 617                      mittelschmerz 572
limb injuries                  mannitol 129, 365, 542         Mobile Medical Team 39
   acute ischaemia 531         MAOIs 619                      monilial infection 662
   paediatric 720              Marburg fever 250              monoamine oxidase
   salvage 422                 march fracture 501                 inhibitors 619
limping child 704              mastitis 599                   Monteggia fracture 449, 501
lip wounds 464                 mastoiditis 550                mood, affect 616
lipid emulsion in              maxillofacial injuries 370     “morning after pill” 568
     poisoning 187, 284        measles 222                    morphine 276
   LA toxicity 284             meconium aspiration 645         children 280
Lisfranc fracture 500          median nerve block 296–7        overdose 188
lithium 617                    median nerve                    smooth muscle spasm 277
   complications of 619           injury 432, 442              trauma 279
lithium                        medical defence                Morton’s metatarsalgia 491
     poisoning 197, 619           organisation 29             mouth to mouth
liver transplantation,         Medical Incident Ofﬁcer 39         ventilation 48, 646
     paracetamol               medically unexplained          MRSA 235
     poisoning 191                symptoms 621                MSU 158
local anaesthesia 272, 282     medicolegal aspects 28, 30     multiple sclerosis 142
   children 287                melaena 124                    mumps 222
   consent 286                 meningitis 224–5, 666–9         orchitis 222, 701
   contraindications 282        fungal 225                    Munchausen’s
   indications 282              tuberculous 225                   syndrome 620
   inﬁltration 289              viral 225                      by proxy 733
   toxicity 284                meningococcal                  muscle injuries 426
   see also nerve blocks          infection 224, 664, 666–9   muscle relaxants 316
locked ﬁnger 441               menorrhagia 574                mushroom poisoning 212
744    INDEX

      myasthenia gravis 142           newborn resuscitation 642       osteochondritis 708–9
      myocardial infarction 68–77     NHS Direct 11                   osteochondritis
       ECG changes 72–5               NHS24, 11                           dissecans 452, 479,
       localization 74                nimodipine 129                      491, 709
       NSTEMI 68                      nitrous oxide 278, 317          osteomyelitis 705
       STEMI 70, 76–7                 non-accidental                   ﬁnger infection 441
      myoclonic ﬁt 688                    injury 728–33                sickle cell disease 176
      myositis ossiﬁcans 427          non-cardiogenic pulmonary        tuberculosis 232
                                          oedema 102                  otitis externa 550
                                      non-shockable rhythms 51        otitis media 550
      N                               non-steroidal anti-             Ottawa ankle rules 484–5
      N-acetylcysteine 190                inﬂammatory                 Ottawa knee rules 475
      nailbed lacerations 435             drugs 275                   ovarian problems 572
      naloxone 188                    normal values                   oxygen therapy 95
      nappy rash 662                    blood tests xvii–xviii         hyperbaric oxygen 208,
      narrow complex                    physiological, children 633         261, 395
          tachycardia 88                pregnancy 577
      nasal bleeding 552              note keeping 4–5, 28
      nasal diamorphine 281           notiﬁable infectious            P
      nasal foreign bodies 546            diseases 221                P wave 64
      nasal fracture 553              NSAIDs 275                      pacemakers 82
      nasoethmoidal fracture 372      nursemaid’s elbow 501           pacing (in ALS) 53
      nasopharyngeal airway 325       nutcracker fracture 501         paediatric emergencies 630
      near drowning 258               nystagmus 548                   paediatric fractures 718
      neck                                                            paediatric milestones 637
       cervical spine                                                 paediatric resuscitation
            injury 380–5              O                                   chart 655
       pain 463                       obsession 603                   pain relief 272
       penetrating injury 378         obstetrics and                  palivizumab,
       soft tissue injury 462             gynaecology 563                 RSV disease 683
       wounds 378                     obstructive jaundice 510        pancreatitis 508
      necrotizing fasciitis 234       OCP 4, 569                        in pregnancy 591
      needle cricothyroidotomy        O’Donahue’s triad 501           paracetamol 274
          326–7                       oesophageal intubation 314        poisoning 190–3
      needlestick injury 418          oesophageal obstruction         parafﬁn poisoning 205
      Neer’s impingement                  (food bolus) 547            paralysis, periodic 143
          test 460                    oesophageal rupture 333         paranasal sinusitis 555
      neglect 732                     olecranon bursitis 453          paraphimosis 523, 702
      nephroblastoma 699              olecranon fracture 450          paraquat poisoning 204
      nephrotic syndrome 694          ophthalmology 533               paratyphoid 248
      nerve blocks 292                opioids 276                     parity 576
       ankle 306–7                      poisoning 188                 paronychia 441
       digital 294–5                    sedation 308                  parotid gland injury 464
       ear 300–1                      optic neuritis 142, 541         parotitis 557
       femoral 304–5                  oral contraceptive pill 4       Parvolex (acetylcysteine)
       forehead 300–1                   drug interactions 569             190
       infraorbital 302               oral rehydration                patella fracture 476, 726
       intercostal 303                    therapy 228                 patellar tendon rupture 478
       median 296–7                   oral wounds 464                 pathological fractures 420
       mental 302                     orbital blow-out                patients
       radial 297–9                       fractures 374                 discharge from ED 2, 8
       supraorbital 300–1             orchitis 522, 701                 discharge of elderly
       sural 306–7                      mumps 222                           patient 20
       tibial 306–7                   organ donation 27                 dislike of speciﬁc 18
       ulnar 296–7                    organophosphate                   inappropriate
      nerve injuries, hand 432, 434       poisoning 206                     attenders 16
      neuroblastoma 699               oropharyngeal airway 325          regular attenders 17
      neuroleptic malignant             children 654                    ‘special’ patient groups 19
          syndrome 265                Osgood-Schlatter’s                transfer of patient 22
      neurological examination            disease 708                   with a label 17
       coma 138                       osmolal gap 99                    with learning
       head injury 360                ossiﬁcation centres 721               difﬁculties 21
       spinal injury 382              osteoarthritis 495              PEA 51
                                                                                  INDEX        745

peak expiratory ﬂow              tension 328–9                  psychiatric drugs,
    rates 105                    traumatic 334                     complications of 619
  children 678                 poisoning 179                    psychiatric interview 604
Pelligrini-Stieda’s              chemical incidents 38, 211     psychiatry 601
    disease 501                  deliberate 180, 753            psychogenic coma 138
pelvic fractures 466–7           diagnosis 182                  psychosis 603
pelvic infection 598             ﬁsh 229                        pulmonary aspiration 112,
pelvic inﬂammatory               food 226–8                        338
    disease 573                  general principles 180         pulmonary contusion 332,
pelvic injury, children 714      in children 181, 696–7            338
penile problems 523, 702         reducing                       pulmonary embolus 120
peptic ulcer disease 511             absorption 184–5            in pregnancy 593
  pregnancy 591                  supportive care 183            pulmonary oedema
pericardial effusion 78–9      poisons information 180–1         cardiogenic 100–1
pericardiocentesis 79, 343     police requests for blood         non-cardiogenic 102
pericarditis 78                    alcohol 30                   pulp infections 441
perineal tear, imminent 580    police statements 31             pulse oximetry 95, 96
periodic paralysis 143         poliomyelitis 249                 CO poisoning 208
peritoneal dialysis 161        polyhydramnios 590               pulseless electrical
peritoneal lavage 347          polymyositis 142                    activity (PEA) 51, 107
peritonitis 161, 504, 507,     porphyria 165                    puncture wounds 419
    516                        post-coital                      purpuric rash 664
peritonsillar abscess 554          contraception 568            pyelonephritis 158, 159
peroneal nerve block 306–7     post-concussion                   children 692–3
peroneal nerve injury 487          symptoms 368                  pregnancy 591
peroneal tendon                post-partum problems 598         pyloric stenosis 698
    subluxation 487            post-resuscitation care 54       pyogenic tenosynovitis 441
perseveration 603              Pott’s fracture 502              pyrexia of unknown
personal protective            PR interval 64                      origin 246
    equipment 32, 34           pre-eclampsia 590, 592
Perthes disease 706–7
pertussis, whooping
                               pregnancy 563, 576–599
                                 abdominal pain 590
                                                                Q
    cough 684                    bleeding in 582–3, 588         Q waves 65, 72
pethidine 276                    cardiac arrest 596             QRS amplitude 65
petit mal 688                    ectopic 586                    QRS width 64
petrol poisoning 205             electric shock 266             QT interval 65
phalangeal fractures 436         hypertension 91, 592           quadriceps rupture 478
pharyngeal burns                 psychiatric problems 599       quinsy 554
    (cocaine) 555                thrombosis 593
phenol burns 397                 trauma 594
phenothiazine                  pregnancy tests 582              R
    poisoning 196              prepatellar bursitis 479         rabies 249, 415
phimosis 702                   pretibial lacerations 481        radial fractures 444–6,
physiological values in        priapism 523                         448–9, 724–5
    children 633               prilocaine 283                   radial head fracture 450,
physiotherapy 428              Prinzmetal’s angina 69               724
Pilon fractures 501            Procurator Fiscal 10, 26, 31     radial head subluxation
pilonidal abscess 518          propofol 308, 316                    (pulled elbow) 724
Pipkin fracture 501            prostatitis 523                  radial nerve block 297–9
placenta praevia 588           prostheses, hip 468              radial nerve injury 432, 453
placental abruption 588, 594   prosthetic joint infection 495   radial styloid fracture 446
plant poisoning 212            prosthetic valve failure 101     radial tenosynovitis 447
plantar fasciitis 491          protective equipment 32, 34      radiation incidents 268
plaster of Paris 424–5         prothrombin time                   decontamination 211, 269
platelet disorders 168             (INR) xviii, 167, 170        radiological requests 6
pleural effusion 103           proxymetacaine 283               radius, fractures 444–6,
Pneumocystis                   pruritus ani 518                     448–9
    infection 110, 244         pruritus vulvae 565                children 724–5
pneumonia 110                  pseudo-gout 496                  Ramsay Hunt
  children 686                 psychiatric assessment 604           syndrome 556
  differential diagnosis 111     after deliberate self          rape 570
pneumothorax                         harm 612–4                 rapid sequence induction
  spontaneous 114–6              history 605                        (intubation, RSI) 312–5
746    INDEX

      rashes 664, 666, 672           rifampicin 190, 225, 569       self-labelled patients 17
      records see note keeping       ring avulsions 435             sepsis 59
      recuronium 316                 Rinne’s test 548                 in babies 660
      red cell transfusion 173       Road Trafﬁc Act 30             septic arthritis 495
      red dot system 6               roadside procedures 36         septic shock 59–61
      red eye 542                    Rockall score 123              septicaemia,
      referral 8, 28                 Rolando fracture 502                meningococcal 666–9
        inappropriate 16             Romano–Ward                    sero-negative spondylo-
        patient with a label 17          syndrome 65                     arthropathies 497
      regular attenders 17           Rosier score, stroke 145       serotonin syndrome 216
      Reiter’s disease 238, 497      rotator cuff tears 459         severe acute
      rejection, transplant 161      rotator cuff tendonitis 461         respiratory syndrome
      relatives                      Rovsing’s sign 507                  (SARS) 33, 251
        bereaved 24–5                RSV 682–3                      Sever’s disease 708
        in cardiac arrest 46         rubella 223                    sevoﬂurane 317
        in major incidents 39        runner’s fracture 502          sexual abuse 733
      renal failure 160, 694                                        sexual assault 570
      renal trauma 351                                              sexually transmitted
      rescue breaths 48              S                                   diseases 238
        children 646                 sacrum fracture 469            Sgarbossa criteria,
      resin casts 424                Sad Persons Scale 614               ACS in LBBB 72
      respiratory depression         safety, personal 609           sharps, safe handling
        coma 137                     salaam attack 688                   disposal 32
        opioids 188, 276             salbutamol                     shellﬁsh poisoning 229
      respiratory failure,             anaphylaxis 43, 651          shifts 15
          type I II 98                 asthma 106, 679–681          shin splints 483
      respiratory rate                 COPD 109                     shingles 240
        coma 137                       hyperkalaemia 162, 694       shock 60
        normal, children 633           inhalation injury 395          anaphylactic 42–4
      respiratory syncytial            poisoning 200                  cardiogenic 60, 77
          virus 682–3                salicylate poisoning 189         hypovolaemic 60, 172–4
      resuscitation                  salivary gland problems 557      in poisoning 183
        burns 392                    Salter-Harris classiﬁcation,     neurogenic 382
        cardiac arrest 46–53             epiphyseal injury 718–9      septic 59
          pregnancy 596              saphenous nerve                shockable rhythm 52, 652–3
        children 634–5, 646–7,           block 306–7                shoulder
            652–5                    SARS 33, 251                     dislocation 454–7
          formulae 655               scabies 231                      injuries 458–9
        discontinuing 51, 655        scalded skin                        children 722
        mechanical 51                    syndrome 235, 662            pain diagnosis 461
        newborn 642–5                scaphoid fracture 442            soft tissue problems 460–1
        paediatric trauma 712          children 725                 shoulder dystocia 580
        post-resuscitation care 54   scapula fracture 458           sick sinus syndrome 80
        trauma 320–1                 scarlet fever 234              sickle cell disease 176–7
        unconscious patient 136      Scheuermann’s disease 708      Sinding Larsen’s disease 708
      resuscitation chart            schizophrenia 618              sinusitis 555
        paediatrics 655                thought blocking 603         SIRS (systemic inﬂammatory
      reteplase 77                   SCIWORA 714                         response syndrome) 59
      retinal artery occlusion 540   scrotal injuries 352           skin lesions
      retinal detachment 541         scrotal swellings,               causes 673
      retinal vein occlusion 540         children 700                 children 672
      retropharyngeal                seborrhoeic dermatitis 662       popping (drugs) 627
          abscess 555                sedation, of violent             problems, infants 662
      return visits 28                   patient 611                skin tissue glue 406
      reverse ﬁght bites 415–16,     sedation for                   skull fracture 355, 361–4
          435                            procedures 308               basal fracture 361, 364
      Revised Trauma Score 323         children 309                   child abuse 731
      rewarming methods 256          seizures 148–9, 688              compound (open) 364
      rhabdomyolysis 214–6,          Seldinger technique 44,          depressed 362, 364
          265, 398                       56, 115                    slit lamp examination 535
      rheumatic fever 497            self-harm                      Smith’s fracture 446, 502
      rheumatoid arthritis 496         deliberate 612, 614          snake bites 417
      rib fracture 330–2               risk of 607                  Snellen chart 534
                                                                             INDEX        747

snowblindness 538            stillbirth 576                 talar injuries 488
sodium bicarbonate           Stimson’s technique 455        team leader 46
  cardiac arrest             stings, bites 416              tear gas 209
    children 654             stool culture 226              teeth
    newborn 644              straddle fracture 502            eruption 559
  hyperkalaemia 162, 694     strains 426                      extraction,
  tricyclic antidepressant   streptococcal                        haemorrhage 561
      poisoning 194–5             infections 234, 528         fractures 560
sodium derangements          streptokinase 77                 toothache 280, 561
    154                      stress fractures, MTs 489        see also dental
soft tissue injuries 426     stridor 676                          emergencies
solvent abuse 626            stroke 144                     telemedicine 11
somatoform pain                Rosier score 145             telephone advice 11
    disorder 621             stye 543                       temperature, core,
sonography, trauma           subacromial bursitis 461           measurement of 254,
    scan 346                 subarachnoid                       264
space-occupying                   haemorrhage 128           temporal arteritis 132, 541
    lesions 133              subclavian vein 56             temporal lobe epilepsy 688
sphincter of Oddi,             venous access 57–8           tendon injury
    spasm 277                subconjunctival                  Achilles 482
spinal cord injury 380–5          haemorrhage 543             ﬁnger 432–4, 440
  airway management          substance misuse 626             hand 447
      380                    subtarsal examination 535        in wounds 404
  children 714               subtrochanteric                  patella 478
  circulation 382                 fractures 472               quadriceps 478
  examination 382            subungual haematoma 435        tendonitis 427
  imaging 384–5, 462         sudden infant death            tenecteplase 77
  incomplete injury               syndrome 658              tennis elbow 452
      patterns 383           suicide, risk of 614           tenosynovitis 427, 441
  muscle power               sulphonylurea                  terrorism, poisoning 181
      grading 383                 poisoning 197             testis problems 522
  neurological               sumatriptan 130                  children 700
      examination 382        superglued eyelids 538           torsion 522, 701
  without radiographic       supracondylar fracture 451,      trauma 352
      abnormality                 742                         undescended 700
      (SCIWORA) 383, 714     supraorbital nerve             tetanus 236
spinal                            block 300–1                 prophylaxis 410
    immobilization 380–1     supratrochlear nerve 300–1     tetracaine 283, 288, 535
spine                        supraventricular tachycardia   TFCC injury 447
  control 320                     (SVT) 86–8                theophylline poisoning 200
  injury 380–5                 children 656                 thiopentone 316
    children 714             sural nerve block 306–7        Thomas splint 473
  Xrays 384–5, 462           surgery 503                    thoracolumbar spine 384
sprains 426                  surgical airway 326–7          throat 554, 674–7
  ankle 487                  sutures 407–9                    examination,
  neck 462                   suxamethonium 316                    children 674–5
  wrist 447                  swine ﬂu 33, 252                 foreign bodies 547
ST segment 65, 70–5          symbols ix                       infection 554, 676–7
staff 2                      synchronized                     sore 554
  care after death of             cardioversion 86          thrombocytopenic purpura,
      patient 27             syncope 140                        idiopathic 664
  debrieﬁng after major        funny turns in,              thromboembolic disease, in
      incident 39                   children 689                pregnancy 593, 599
  interaction 15             synovitis, transient 706       thrombolysis
  sudden infant death        systemic inﬂammatory             myocardial
      syndrome 659                response syndrome 59            infarction 76–7
staphylococcal                                                pulmonary embolus 121
    infections 235, 662                                       stroke 145
staples 407                  T                              thrombophlebitis,
status epilepticus 148–9     T waves 65, 72                     superﬁcial 119, 529
  children 690               tachyarrythmias 86–9           thrombosis, deep vein 118
Steristrips 406, 481         tachycardia                      pregnancy 593
sternum fracture 331           algorithm 84–5               thrush 566, 662
748    INDEX

      thumb, collateral ligament    tricyclic antidepressant       vaginal infection 566
          injuries 438, 440             poisoning 194–5            Valsalva manoeuvre 88
      thyrotoxic crisis 156         trigeminal neuralgia 132       varicella zoster 240
      TIA 146–7                     trigger ﬁnger/thumb 441        varices 123
      tibia                         TRISS methodology 323          varicose veins 529
        fractures 477, 480          tropical diseases 246          vecuronium 316
          children 727              troponins 71                   venereal proctitis 519
      tibial nerve block 306–7      trouble                        venous access
      ticks, bites 231, 416           aggressive patient 608         central 56
      TICTAC 180                      avoidance of 28, 608           children 638
      Tillaux fracture 502            violence/violent               choice of vein 56
      TIMI risk score 69                  patients 608–611           cut down 639
      toddler’s fracture 502, 727   tuberculosis 232, 685            intraosseous 640–1
      Todd’s paresis 144, 148       tuberculous meningitis 225       umbilical vein 645
      toe fractures 490             tympanic membrane              venous thrombosis 118
      toe injuries 490                  rupture 551                  cerebral 133
      toenails, ingrowing 491       typhoid 248                      in pregnancy 593
      tongue wounds 464                                            venous ulcers 529
      tonsillitis 554                                              ventilation
      torsades de pointes 87        U                                in asthma 107, 679
      torticollis 463               ulcerative colitis 517           in children 654
      TOXBASE 181                   ulcerative keratitis 543         in COPD 108
      toxic shock syndrome 235,     ulna, fractures 448, 725         hyperventilation 97
          567                       ulnar nerve block 296–7          mouth to mouth 48, 646
      tracheal intubation 312–5     ulnar nerve injury 432, 453      in newborn 642
        children 654                ultrasound                       non-invasive 109
        newborn 644                   diagnosis of DVT 119, 593    ventricular activation
        trauma 325                    for nerve blocks 292             time 72
      tracheal tube size for          in pregnancy 576, 584,       ventricular shunts 133
          children 654–5                  587, 589                 ventricular
      tracheitis, bacterial 677       in trauma (FAST) 346,            tachycardia 86–7
      traction apophysitis 708            595                        children 652, 656
      tranquillization,               for venous access 56, 639    vertigo 549
          emergency 611             umbilical cord sepsis 660      violence/violent
      transcutaneous pacing 82      umbilical vein                     patients 608–11
      transfer of patient 22            cannulation 645              intoxication 623
      transfusion                   unconscious patient 136        viral arthritis 496
        blood 172                   upper gastrointestinal tract   viral haemorrhagic
        massive 174                     bleeding 122                   fevers 250
      transfusion reactions 175     upper respiratory tract        visual acuity 534
      transient ischaemic               infections, children 676   visual loss, sudden 540
          attacks 146               ureteric colic 524             vitreous haemorrhage 541
      transplant patients 161       urethral carbuncle 565         volar plate injury 440
      transplantation of            urethral injuries 352          volvulus 516, 698
          liver, paracetamol        urethritis 238, 497            vomiting, bilious vomiting in
          poisoning 191             urinary retention 520              babies 661
      transport emergency card      urinary tract infections       von Willebrand’s
          (TREM) 36                     (UTIs) 158, 591                disease 166, 168
      transvenous pacing 82           children 692                 vulval ulcers 565
      trauma                        urine microscopy 158, 693      vulvovaginal problems 565
        injury prevention 711       urticaria, neonatal 662
        injury severity score       USS see ultrasound
             (ISS) 323              uterine bleeding 574           W
        in pregnancy 594            uterine problems 572           wasp stings 416
        major 319–99                uterine rupture 594            weakness, generalised 142
        paediatric 710              uterine size, pregnancy 577    Weber’s test 548
        paediatric                  uveitis 542                    weight estimation,
             resucitation 712                                         children 633
                                                                   Weil’s disease 239
        Revised Trauma
             Score 323
                                    V                              Wells criteria 119–20
      trench foot 257               vaccines, immunization 636     Wernicke’s
      triage 7                      vaginal bleeding 574              encephalopathy 625
        mental health 612             in pregnancy 582–3, 588      whole-bowel irrigation 185
                                                                     INDEX   749

whooping cough 684       exploration 404
Wilm’s tumour 699        foreign bodies in 405
                                                 X
Wolff-Parkinson-White    of hand 434             X-rays
   syndrome 89           infection 413, 415       children 720
worms 230                in children 715          in pregnancy 576
wounds 401–19            lip 464                  reporting system 6
 of abdomen 350          of neck 378              requests 6
 antibiotics 411, 422    oral 464
 bites/stings 414        puncture 419
 of chest 340–3          tendon injury 434       Z
 child abuse 730         of tongue 464           zip entrapment of
 classiﬁcation 403       X-rays 404                  foreskin 702
 cleaning 406           wrist                    zygomatic (malar)
 closure 406             anatomy 430                 fractures 374
 delayed primary         dislocations 442–3
     closure 412         fractures 442–6
 ear 464                 nerve blocks 296–9



################################################################################
# SECTION 2: FIRST AID, CPR & AED GUIDE
# Source: Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED Instructor Manual (2016).pdf
################################################################################

                                      INSTRUCTOR MANUAL
International English eBook edition © 2016 American Heart Association
ISBN: 978-1-61669-567-5. 15-2810
Original English edition
Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED Instructor Manual
© 2016 American Heart Association
Acknowledgments
The American Heart Association thanks the following people for their
contributions to the development of this manual: Jeff A. Woodin,
NREMT-P; Mary Fran Hazinski, RN, MSN; Robert Lee Hanna;
Kostas Alibertis, CCEMT-P; Tony Connelly, EMT-P, BHSc, PGCEd;
Brian E. Grunau, MD; Jeanette Previdi, MPH, BSN, RN-BC; Mark
Terry, MPA, NREMT-P; Julie Crider, PhD; Moira Muldoon; and the
AHA Heartsaver Project Team.

      To find out about any updates or corrections to this
      text, visit www.international.heart.org, navigate to
      the page for this course, and click on “Updates.”
Part 1
Preparing for the Course
               Course Overview
                     Course Goal
                     Learning Objectives
                     Critical Role of the Instructor
                     Educational Design
                     Portfolio Structure
                     Benefits of Blended Learning
                     Preparing to Teach Blended-
                         Learning Courses
                     Validation of Online Course
                         Certificates

               Course Audience
                     Who Can Take the Course
                     Students With Special Needs
                     Course Flexibility

               Instructor Needs and Resources
                     Who Can Teach the Course
                     Lead Instructor
                     Instructor-to-Student Ratio
              Course Planning and Support
                Materials
                      Sample Precourse Letter to
                         Students (Classroom Course)
                      Sample Precourse Letter to
                         Students (Blended Course)
                      Smoking Policy
                      Notice of Courses
                      Instructor Network
                      Ordering Materials
                      Copyright of AHA Content
                      Exam Security
                      Room Requirements
                      Sample Floor Plan
                      Core Curriculum
                      Non-AHA Content
                      Course Equipment
                      CPR AED Equipment Checklist
                      First Aid Equipment Checklist
                      Infection Control
                      Manikin Cleaning Options

Part 2
Teaching the Course
              Instructor Teaching Materials
                      Understanding Icons
                      Understanding Lesson Plans
                      Using Lesson Plans
                      Assembling Lesson Plans
                    Teaching With a Video
                    Practice While Watching
                    Using the Student Workbook
                    Importance of High-Quality CPR
                    Sample Course Agendas

Part 3
Testing and Remediation
              Testing for Course Completion
                    Course Completion Requirements
                    When to Give Tests
                    Exam (Optional)
                    Skills Testing
                    Using a Stopwatch
                    Using the Skills Testing Checklists
                       and Critical Skills Descriptors
                    Retesting Students

              Remediation
                    Informal and Formal Remediation
                    Steps to Successful Remediation

              After the Course
                    Program Evaluation
                    Issuing Provider Cards/eCards
                    Application for CE/CME

              Heartsaver Student Renewal
                    Renewal Timeline
Part 4
Additional Resources
              Course Outlines
                     Heartsaver Adult CPR AED Outline
                     Heartsaver Child CPR AED Outline
                     Heartsaver Infant CPR Outline
                     Heartsaver First Aid Outline
                     Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED
                       Blended Course Outline

              Skills Testing Checklists and Critical
                 Skills Descriptors
                     Understanding the Adult CPR and
                         AED Skills Testing Checklist
                     Adult CPR and AED Skills Testing
                         Checklist
                     Adult CPR and AED Skills Testing
                         Critical Skills Descriptors
                     Understanding the Child CPR Skills
                         Testing Checklist
                     Child CPR Skills Testing Checklist
                     Child CPR Skills Testing Critical
                         Skills Descriptors
                     Understanding the Infant CPR Skills
                         Testing Checklist
                     Infant CPR Skills Testing Checklist
                     Infant CPR Skills Testing Critical
                         Skills Descriptors
                     Understanding the First Aid Skills
                         Testing Checklist
                    First Aid Skills Testing Checklist

              Instructor Training and Renewal
                    Recruiting and Mentoring
                        Instructors
                    Instructor Candidate Selection
                    Instructor Course Prerequisites
                    Maintaining Instructor Status
                    Issuing an Instructor Card

              CPR FAQs
                    Cardiac Arrest vs Heart Attack

              First Aid FAQs

Part 5
Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED Lesson Plans
              Adult CPR AED Lesson Plans

              Child CPR AED Lesson Plans

              Infant CPR Lesson Plans

              First Aid Lesson Plans

Part 6
Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED Blended
Lesson Plans
Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED Instructor
Resources
These instructor resources can be found on CPRverify.org.

               Heartsaver CPR AED

                       Precourse Materials
                               CPR AED Equipment Checklist
                               Sample Precourse Letter to
                                 Students (Classroom Course)
                               Sample Precourse Letter to
                                 Students (Blended Course)
                               Sample Heartsaver CPR AED
                                 Course Agenda
                               Sample Heartsaver First Aid CPR
                                 AED Blended Course Agenda

                       Course Materials
                               Life Is Why™ Activity Page

                       Course Resources
                               CPR FAQs

                       Testing Resources
                               Adult CPR and AED Skills Testing
                                 Checklist
                Skills Testing Critical Skills
                    Descriptors
             Child CPR Skills Testing Checklist
                 Skills Testing Critical Skills
                    Descriptors
             Infant CPR Skills Testing Checklist
                 Skills Testing Critical Skills
                    Descriptors

Heartsaver First Aid

      Precourse Materials
             First Aid Equipment Checklist
             Sample Precourse Letter to
                 Students (Classroom Course)
             Sample Precourse Letter to
                 Students (Blended Course)
             Sample Heartsaver First Aid Course
               Agenda
             Sample Heartsaver First Aid CPR
               AED Blended Course Agenda

      Course Materials
             Life Is Why™ Activity Page

      Course Resources
             First Aid FAQs

      Testing Resources
             First Aid Skills Testing Checklist
              Preparing for the Course

Course Overview

Course Goal      The Heartsaver® First Aid and CPR AED
                 Courses are designed to prepare people to
                 provide first aid, cardiopulmonary
                 resuscitation (CPR), and automated external
                 defibrillator (AED) use in a safe, timely, and
                 effective manner. The course goals include
                 cognitive and psychomotor objectives.

Learning         At the end of the Heartsaver CPR AED
Objectives       Course, students will be able to
                     Describe how high-quality CPR
                     improves survival
                     Explain the concepts of the Chain of
                     Survival
                     Recognize when someone needs CPR
                     Perform high-quality CPR for an adult
                     Describe how to perform CPR with help
                     from others
    Give effective breaths by using mouth-
    to-mouth or a mask for all age groups
    Demonstrate how to use an AED on an
    adult
    Perform high-quality CPR for a child
    Demonstrate how to use an AED on a
    child
    Perform high-quality CPR for an infant
    Describe when and how to help a
    choking adult or child
    Demonstrate how to help a choking
    infant

At the end of the Heartsaver First Aid
Course, students will be able to
    List the priorities, roles, and
    responsibilities of first aid rescuers
    Describe the key steps in first aid
    Remove protective gloves (skill student
    will demonstrate)
    Find the problem (skill student will
    demonstrate)
    Describe the assessment and first aid
    actions for the following life-threatening
    conditions: heart attack, difficulty
    breathing, choking, severe bleeding,
    shock, and stroke
    Use an epinephrine pen (skill student
    will demonstrate)
    Control bleeding and bandaging (skills
    student will demonstrate)
    Recognize elements of common
    injuries
                          Recognize elements of common
                          illnesses
                          Describe how to find information on
                          preventing illness and injury
                          Recognize the legal questions that
                          apply to first aid rescuers

Critical Role of the The instructor is critical to successful
Instructor           student outcomes. During the course, the
                      instructor should
                          Ensure that students demonstrate high-
                          quality CPR and other principles of care
                          consistent with the 2015 American
                          Heart Association (AHA) Guidelines
                          Update for CPR and Emergency
                          Cardiovascular Care (ECC)
                          Facilitate instructor-led discussions with
                          a focus on desired outcome
                          Listen to students’ responses and
                          provide feedback to ensure
                          understanding of learning concepts
                          Observe students’ actions and coach as
                          required
                          Give positive or corrective feedback
                          Keep discussions and simulations on
                          track for optimal learning and use of
                          time in the classroom

Educational           The American Heart Association (AHA)
Design                Heartsaver® First Aid CPR AED and
                      Bloodborne Pathogens Courses are
                      designed for anyone with little or no medical
                      training who need a course completion card
                      for job, regulatory, or other requirements.
                      AHA courses meet US Occupational Safety
                      and Health Administration (OSHA)
                      requirements. We offer flexible solutions for
                      students by providing both eLearning and
                      classroom courses.

                      Blended Learning
                      Depending on the course content,
                      Heartsaver blended courses include 3 parts.
                      Part 1 is the online portion that can be
                      completed at work, home, or wherever you
                      have online access. Parts 2 and 3 include a
                      hands-on skills practice and testing session
                      conducted in person with an AHA Instructor.

                      Instructor-Led Training
                      Heartsaver classroom courses are video-
                      based, instructor-led courses that teach
                      students critical skills to respond to and
                      manage an emergency in the first few
                      minutes until someone with more advanced
                      training arrives and takes over (ie,
                      emergency medical services [EMS]). The
                      course includes group interaction and
                      hands-on coaching and feedback from an
                      AHA Instructor. Classroom courses may be
                      conducted on-site at the company’s location.

Portfolio Structure The structure of the Heartsaver product line
                      allows you to teach the individual sections
                      that apply to the students in a specific
                      course. In any course that includes first aid
                      and CPR, you will teach the CPR portion
                      first.
You must always teach choking. Choking is
included in CPR AED courses. If you teach
First Aid but not CPR AED, then choking
must be included in the First Aid course.
Choking is taught together with breathing
difficulties in the First Aid course, and when
to teach it is noted on the relevant First Aid
Lesson Plans.
Within the Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED
Course, you can teach any of the following
combinations:
    First Aid
    First Aid, Adult CPR AED
    First Aid, Adult CPR AED, Child CPR
    AED
    First Aid, Adult CPR AED, Infant CPR
    First Aid, Adult CPR AED, Child CPR
    AED, Infant CPR
    Adult CPR AED
    Adult CPR AED, Child CPR AED
    Adult CPR AED, Infant CPR
    Adult CPR AED, Child CPR AED, Infant
    CPR
This customizable format allows instructors
to meet the needs of students while
ensuring consistency among all Heartsaver
courses taught.
Teaching about masks is required for adults.
Teaching about masks in CPR for children
and infants used to be optional, but it is now
required.
                     For more information, refer to the course-
                     specific details for the course you are
                     teaching.

Benefits of          The online component of the blended-
Blended Learning     learning experience benefits both students
                     and instructors. Online learning
                     accommodates many different learning
                     styles. For example, some students prefer
                     learning in a self-directed environment as
                     opposed to a group setting. Also, online
                     learning is time efficient for the following
                     reasons:
                         Students have the flexibility to take the
                         online instruction whenever their
                         schedules permit. Time spent at a
                         Training Center or other facility for
                         supervised practice and testing is
                         reduced.
                         Instructors have more time to focus on
                         students’ learning needs, such as
                         answering questions, coaching, and
                         skills development.

Preparing to Teach To be prepared to teach a blended-learning
Blended-Learning course, we recommend that instructors take
Courses            the online course for each discipline they
                     teach. This will help instructors understand
                     what students learn in the online course. As
                     with instructor-led courses, all online
                     courses are developed by using educational
                     principles and best practices. Course
                     materials are presented in a way that helps
                    students learn and retain the information.
                    Students are required to complete all online
                    course activities, which are designed to
                    teach and test core concepts. The online
                    instruction is also designed to help students
                    transfer and apply their knowledge to skills
                    performance.
                    Instructors should review all course
                    materials, including the Instructor Manual,
                    skills testing checklists, critical skills
                    descriptors, and skills sections of the course
                    video.

Validation of       When a student has completed the online
Online Course       portion of any AHA course, a skills practice
Certificates        and testing session must be completed with
                    an AHA Instructor.
                    As a Heartsaver Instructor, you may be
                    asked to do a skills practice and testing
                    session for any of the several Heartsaver
                    online courses. You can confirm that the
                    certificate a student brings you is valid.
                          To validate a student’s Part 1
                          completion certificate, go to
                    http://www.onlineaha.org/verify_certificat
                    e

Course Audience

Who Can Take the Anyone can take the course. There are no
Course           prerequisites.
Students With        The AHA does not provide advice to Training
Special Needs        Centers on Americans With Disabilities Act
                     requirements or any other laws, rules, or
                     regulations. Training Centers must
                     determine accommodations necessary to
                     comply with applicable laws. The AHA
                     recommends consultation with legal
                     counsel.
                     A student must be able to successfully
                     complete all course completion
                     requirements to receive a course completion
                     card. Reasonable accommodations may be
                     made, such as manikin positioning, use of a
                     text reader, or the exam being read to the
                     student.
                     If a student is unable to successfully
                     complete skills testing because of a
                     disability, he or she should be given written
                     documentation of class attendance, with a
                     listing of what testing was not successfully
                     completed.

Course Flexibility   The AHA allows instructors to tailor the
                     Heartsaver courses to meet audience-
                     specific needs. Any changes to the course
                     are in addition to the basic course contents
                     as outlined in this manual. These changes
                     will add to the length of the course but
                     should not alter the flow of the course.
                     Instructors may not delete course lessons or
                     course components. Any additions or
                     alterations to the course must be specifically
                     identified as non-AHA material. Please refer
                  to the section titled Non-AHA Content in this
                  Instructor Manual for further detail.

Instructor Needs and Resources

Who Can Teach     AHA courses must be taught by AHA
the Course        Instructors who have current instructor
                  status in their specific discipline.
                  An AHA Instructor in the appropriate
                  discipline must also perform the formal
                  assessment or testing of students.

Lead Instructor   If more than 1 instructor is teaching in a
                  Heartsaver course, a lead instructor needs
                  to be designated. The lead instructor will
                  oversee the communication among all
                  instructors before and during the course.
                  The lead instructor will also be responsible
                  for issuing and ensuring that students
                  receive course completion cards from the
                  instructor’s Training Center and that all
                  course paperwork (eg, roster, skills testing
                  checklists, course evaluations) is supplied
                  for the training.
                  The following guidelines apply to lead
                  instructors for provider courses:
                      The lead instructor can also fill the role
                      of instructor in the course.
                      The lead instructor is responsible for
                      course logistics and quality assurance.
                      The lead instructor is assigned by the
                      Training Center Coordinator.
Instructor-to-       The course size for the Heartsaver courses
Student Ratio        is flexible. The course is designed for a ratio
                     of 3 students to 1 manikin, with no more
                     than 2 manikins to 1 instructor. With this
                     ratio, 1 instructor observes 2 students during
                     video-led manikin practice (practice while
                     watching). The video for the course is
                     designed to allow the practice-while-
                     watching sections to be repeated as many
                     times as required.
                     Experienced instructors may monitor as
                     many as 3 manikin stations at a time while
                     the students practice. This would change
                     the ratio to 9 students to 3 manikins to 1
                     instructor.
                     For optimal practice time during the course,
                     each student would have her own manikin, if
                     possible. However, using a 1:1 student-to-
                     manikin ratio will not decrease overall class
                     time. One instructor cannot adequately
                     monitor more than 3 manikin stations during
                     a single practice-while-watching video
                     segment.
                     For skills evaluation, use a 1:1 instructor-to-
                     student ratio.

Course Planning and Support Materials

Sample Precourse The letter below is a sample you may modify
Letter to Students and send to students attending a Heartsaver
                     course.
(Classroom
Course)
             (Date)

             Dear Heartsaver® Course Student:
             Welcome to the Heartsaver __________
             Course. Enclosed are the agenda and
             your copy of the Heartsaver __________
             Student Workbook. Please bring your
             workbook to class; you will be able to
             refer to it during the exam (if applicable).
             Review both the agenda and the
             workbook before coming to class so that
             you learn more and are more comfortable
             with the course.
             The class is scheduled for
             Date: ________________________
             Time: ________________________
             Location: _____________________

             Please wear loose, comfortable clothing.
             You will be practicing skills that require
             working on your hands and knees,
             bending, standing, and lifting. If you have
             physical conditions that might prevent
             you from participating in the course,
             please tell one of the instructors when
             you arrive for the course. The instructor
             will work to accommodate your needs
             within the stated course completion
             requirements. In the event that you are ill,
                      please notify your instructor to reschedule
                      your training.
                      We look forward to welcoming you on
                      (day and date of class). If you have any
                      questions about the course, please call
                      (name) at (telephone number).
                      Sincerely,

                      (Name), Lead Instructor

Sample Precourse The letter below is a sample you may modify
Letter to Students and send to students completing a
(Blended Course) Heartsaver blended course.

                      (Date)

                      Dear Heartsaver® Blended Course
                      Student:
                      Welcome to the Heartsaver __________
                      Blended Course. This course has 2
                      components: an online portion and an
                      instructor-led classroom portion. You
                      must complete the online portion first.
                      Your course key to access the online
                      portion is (key number).
                      Important: You must print the
                      certificate of completion at the end of
                      the online portion. You will need to give
this to your instructor when you attend
the classroom portion. It is necessary to
show that you completed the online
portion. If you do not have your certificate
of completion, you will not be able to
complete the skills practice and testing of
the course.
The classroom portion is scheduled for
Date: ________________________
Time: ________________________
Location: _____________________

Please wear loose, comfortable clothing.
You will be practicing skills that require
working on your hands and knees,
bending, standing, and lifting. If you have
physical conditions that might prevent
you from participating in the course,
please tell one of the instructors when
you arrive for the course. The instructor
will work to accommodate your needs
within the stated course completion
requirements. In the event that you are ill,
please notify your instructor to reschedule
your training.
We look forward to welcoming you on
(day and date of class). If you have any
questions about the course, please call
(name) at (telephone number).
Sincerely,
                      (Name), Lead Instructor

Smoking Policy       The Training Center must prohibit smoking
                     in classrooms and training facilities during
                     all AHA ECC training programs.

Notice of Courses           For AHA international instructors, the
                            AHA offers the ECC Global Connector,
                     where instructors can enter and maintain the
                     classes they offer to the general public.
                     These are displayed to customers searching
                     for scheduled classes at the AHA’s CPR &
                     First Aid website,
                     www.international.heart.org. Before
                     entering classes, check with your Training
                     Center to determine what policies your
                     Training Center may have about entering
                     classes. As an instructor, you can still add
                     your classes for display through ECC Global
                     Connector even if your Training Center does
                     not provide listings in the ECC Global
                     Connector.

Instructor Network The AHA provides the Instructor Network as
                     a resource to instructors. Here, instructors
                     can access up-to-date resources and
                     reference information about AHA ECC
                     programs and science.

                                    AHA Instructor
                                      Network
                                www.ahainstructornetw
                                      ork.org

                     All AHA Instructors are required to register
                     on the Instructor Network and be aligned
                     with a Training Center. Alignment must be
                     approved by that Training Center before
                     access to content is available. Acceptance
                     of the user agreement is required during
                     registration.
                     Once registered and approved, you will
                     receive an instructor identification number.
                     This number will be placed on your
                     instructor card and is the same for all
                     disciplines. This number stays the same if
                     you change Training Centers. It is used on
                     all course completion cards for classes that
                     you teach.
                     The AHA reserves the right to delete or deny
                     alignments on the Instructor Network.

Ordering Materials         To help with the distribution of ECC
                           materials, the AHA has partnered with
                     companies in the United States and all
                     international territories that provide high-
                     quality customer service and support. A
                     current list of distributors for your country is
                     available on the CPR & First Aid website,
                     www.international.heart.org.
                     As an instructor, you can order books and
                     other support materials directly from any
                     AHA distributor, but only a Training Center
                   Coordinator can order course completion
                   cards from an authorized AHA distributor.
                   Work with your Training Center Coordinator
                   to ensure that cards are issued to the
                   students in the classes you teach.

Copyright of AHA   The AHA owns the copyright to AHA books
Content            and other training materials. These
                   materials may not be copied, in whole or in
                   part, without the prior written consent of the
                   AHA.
                         For more information and to request
                         permission to reprint, copy, or use
                   portions of ECC textbooks or other
                   materials, go to copyright.heart.org.

Exam Security      To prevent possible compromise, exams are
                   distributed to Training Center Coordinators
                   only. Contact your Training Center
                   Coordinator for the specific exams you will
                   need for a course.
                   Exam security is of the utmost importance:
                       Ensure that all exams are kept secure
                       and not copied or distributed outside
                       the classroom.
                       Exams cannot be edited, and only AHA-
                       translated exams can be used.*
                       Course exams may not be posted to
                       any learning management system,
                       Internet, or intranet site.
                       Always use the current exams to
                       determine successful course
                   completion.
                   Each exam should be accounted for
                   and returned to the instructor at the end
                   of the testing period.
                   If you are receiving the exams
                   electronically from your Training Center
                   Coordinator, they must be sent to an
                   email address that only you can
                   access.
               *Exams are translated into multiple
               languages. If a translated exam is required
               for a course you are teaching, have your
               Training Center Coordinator check to see if
               the required translation is available.

Room           When selecting a location for a Heartsaver
Requirements   course, make sure the room has
                   Good acoustics
                   A clean and well-maintained
                   environment
                   Bright lighting that can be adjusted for
                   video presentations
                   An instructor-controlled video player
                   and a monitor or screen large enough
                   to be viewed by all the students
                   Speakers that will provide good sound
                   quality for the video
                   A chair for each student
                   Ideally, a firm surface with adequate
                   padding/protection for skills practice
                   (eg, carpeted floors, sturdy tabletop,
                   hospital bed, padded mats)
                               A table for completing the exam (if
                               required), for those students completing
                               the course

Sample Floor Plan Figure 1 shows a sample floor plan. Arrange
                       the room so that all students can see the
                       video screen and instructors can monitor
                       student groups during practice.

Figure 1. Sample floor plan.

Core Curriculum        Each AHA course must follow the guidelines
                       and core curriculum in the most current
                  editions of the Heartsaver Student
                  Workbooks and Instructor Manual. Current
                  editions of AHA course materials must serve
                  as the primary training resources during the
                  course.

Non-AHA Content   As an instructor, you can best serve your
                  students when you can adapt to meet the
                  needs of a specific audience. As discussed
                  earlier, some course flexibility has been
                  added to the AHA courses in the form of a
                  wider range of scenarios. If you find that
                  your students will be better served by
                  adding location-specific information,
                  equipment, or specialty-specific content and
                  you plan to discuss that non-AHA content in
                  class or distribute handouts, follow these
                  rules:
                      None of the required AHA lessons or
                      course content can be eliminated or
                      shortened.
                      Any changes to the course are in
                      addition to the basic content as outlined
                      in your Instructor Manual.
                      Adding additional content will add time
                      to the course.
                      Any location-specific protocols or
                      procedures that do not comply with the
                      AHA process (eg, substituting new
                      medications, specialized techniques)
                      should be identified to the audience as
                      location-specific.
                      Any non-AHA content must be identified
                      as not approved or reviewed by the
                        AHA, and the source of the information
                        must be provided to the students.
                        Supplementary materials that you use
                        must be approved by the Lead
                        Instructor, or the Course Director for
                        advanced courses, as well as your
                        Training Center Coordinator.
                        A copy of a revised agenda and any
                        print material shared in class must be
                        part of the permanent course file.
                        Your students cannot be tested on non-
                        AHA content. If they complete the AHA-
                        defined course completion
                        requirements, they must be issued an
                        AHA course completion card or eCard.

                          For questions about adding location-
                          specific information or specialty-
                    specific content, contact
                    resuscitationlearning@heart.org.

Course Equipment All AHA ECC courses require that manikins
                    and equipment allow demonstration of the
                    core skills of the course being taught (eg,
                    airway management, correct hand
                    placement, compression depth, chest
                    recoil).
                    The AHA neither endorses nor recommends
                    a particular brand of manikin or other
                    equipment. The decision on which brand or
                    model of equipment to use is the
                    responsibility of the Training Center. The
                    AHA does strongly encourage the use of
                    manikins that provide audiovisual feedback
                       to help aid both students and instructors on
                       psychomotor skill performance.
                       Equipment required for each class held is
                       listed in the tables below. All equipment
                       used must be in proper working order and
                       good repair.
                       The course-specific details for each course
                       list the required and recommended
                       (optional) equipment for that course. Make
                       sure that all equipment is available and
                       working before the course starts.
                       This table below lists the equipment
                       required for teaching Adult, Child, and Infant
                       CPR AED courses.

CPR AED Equipment Checklist
       Equipment              Adult       Child      Infant      ✓
Course roster,               Require    Require     Require
1/course                     d          d           d
Name tags (optional),        Recom      Recom       Recom
1/student and instructor     mended     mended      mended
                             (optiona   (optiona    (optiona
                             l)         l)          l)
Course agenda,               Require    Require     Require
1/student and instructor     d          d           d
Course completion card,      Require    Require     Require
1/student                    d          d           d
Student Workbook,            Require    Require     Require
1/student and instructor     d          d           d
Instructor Manual with       Require   Require    Require
Lesson Plans,                d         d          d
1/instructor
Precourse letter,            Require   Require    Require
1/student                    d         d          d
Skills testing checklist,    Adult     Child      Infant
1/student                    CPR       CPR        CPR
                             and       Skills     Skills
                             AED       Testing    Testing
                             Skills    Checkli    Checkli
                             Testing   st         st
                             Checkli
                             st
TV with DVD player           Require   Require    Require
or                           d         d          d
Computer with projector,
screen, and speakers,
1/course
Course video,                Require   Require    Require
1/course                     d         d          d
Adult manikin with shirt,    Require   Recom      N/A
1/every 3 students           d         mended
                                       (optiona
                                       l)
Child manikin with shirt,    N/A       Require    N/A
1/every 3 students                     d
Infant manikin with shirt,   N/A       N/A        Require
1/every 3 students                                d
AED trainer with adult       Require   Require    N/A
AED training pads            d         d, child
                                        pads
                                        optional
 Spare batteries for AED     Require    Require     Require
 trainer                     d          d           d
 Barrier device (mask),      Require    Require     Require
 1/every 3 students or       d          d, child-   d,
 1/student                              appropri    infant-
                                        ate         appropri
                                                    ate
 One-way valve, 1/student    Require    Require     Require
                             d          d           d
 Face shield,                Recom      Recom       Recom
 1/student                   mended     mended      mended
                             (optiona   (optiona    (optiona
                             l)         l)          l)
 Stopwatch,                  Require    Require     Require
 1/instructor                d          d           d
 Manikin cleaning supplies   Require    Require     Require
 (such as alcohol pads)      d          d           d

The same equipment is required whether you teach First Aid.

First Aid Equipment Checklist
                Equipment                    Quantity          ✓
 Course roster                          1/course
 Name tags (optional)                   1/student and
                                        instructor
 Course agenda                          1/student and
                                        instructor
 Course completion card                     1/student
 Student Workbook                           1/student and
                                            instructor
 Instructor Manual with Lesson Plans        1/instructor
 Precourse letter                           1/student
 Skills testing checklist                   1/student
 TV with DVD player                         1/course
 or
 Computer with projector, screen, and
 speakers
 Course video                               1/course
 Pair of latex-free gloves                  1/student
 Epinephrine pen trainer                    1/every 2 students
 A small stack of gauze pads (4 × 4         1/every 2 students
 inches [10.2 cm × 10.2 cm])
 1 bandage (roll of gauze)                  1/every 2 students
 Magazines for splint (optional)            1/every 2 students

Infection Control           Students should be told in advance that
                            CPR training sessions involve close physical
                            contact with other students.
                            Participants and instructors should postpone
                            CPR training if they are known to be in the
                            active stages of an infectious disease, have
                            reason to believe they have been exposed
                            to an infectious disease, or have open sores
                            or cuts on their hands, mouth, or area
                            around the mouth.
Manikin Cleaning   To reduce the risk of potential disease
Options            transmission, all manikins and training
                   equipment need to be thoroughly cleaned
                   after each class. Manikins used for CPR
                   practice and testing require special actions
                   to be taken between each student. The AHA
                   strongly recommends that you follow
                   manufacturers’ recommendations for
                   manikin use and maintenance. In the
                   absence of manufacturers’
                   recommendations, the guidelines below may
                   be used during and after courses.
                   During Class
                       Students and instructors should
                       practice good hygiene with proper
                       hand-washing techniques.
                       When individual protective face shields
                       are used, all decontamination
                       recommendations listed for cleaning
                       manikins during and after a course
                       should still be followed. In addition, to
                       reduce the risks to each user for
                       exposure to contaminants, ensure that
                       all students consistently place the same
                       side of the face shield on the manikin
                       during use.
                       If you are not using face shields during
                       the course, manikins should be cleaned
                       after use by each student with a
                       manikin wipe that has an antiseptic with
                       70% ethyl alcohol.
                       – Open the packet and take out and
                           unfold the manikin wipe.
    – Rub the manikin’s mouth and nose
      vigorously with the wipe.
    – Wrap the wipe snugly over the
      mouth and nose.
    – Keep the wipe in place for 30
      seconds.
    – Dry the manikin’s face with a clean
      paper towel or something similar.
    – Continue with the ventilation
      practice.
After Class
    Manikins should be taken apart as
    directed by the manufacturer. Anyone
    taking apart and decontaminating
    manikins should wear protective gloves
    and wash his or her hands when
    finished.
    Any part of the manikin that came in
    contact with potentially infectious body
    fluids during training should be cleaned
    as soon as possible at the end of each
    class to prevent contaminants from
    drying on manikin surfaces.
    If manikins are stored for more than 24
    hours before cleaning, follow these
    steps:
     – All surfaces, reusable protective face
        shields, and pocket masks should be
        washed thoroughly with warm, soapy
        water and brushes.
     – All surfaces should be moistened
        with a sodium hypochlorite solution
        having at least 500 ppm free
        available chlorine (¼ cup of liquid
   household bleach per gallon of tap
   water) for 10 minutes. This solution
   must be made fresh for each class
   and discarded after each use. Using
   a concentration higher than ¼ cup
   has not been proven to be more
   effective and may discolor the
   manikins.
– All surfaces should be rinsed with
   fresh water and allowed to air dry
   before storing.
– Some manufacturers have
   recommendations for cleaning
   manikin parts in a dishwasher.
   Check with the manufacturer of the
   manikins being used to determine if
   this is an acceptable method. Some
   manikin materials could be damaged
   in a dishwasher.
Disposable airway equipment must be
replaced at the end of each day of
class.
Manikin clothing and the manikin
carrying case should be cleaned
periodically or when soiled.
Other equipment used in class needs to
be maintained according to hospital
policy. Surfaces touched by students
should be wiped with antiseptic
solution.
                Teaching the Course

Instructor Teaching Materials

Understanding   The icons used in the Lesson Plans, in this
Icons           manual, and in the Heartsaver course
                videos are there to remind you to take
                certain actions during the course. The
                Lesson Plans and videos contain the
                following icons:

                     Icon                 Action

                                 Student Workbook

                                 Discussion

                                 Play video
                                 Pause video

                                 Stop video

                                 Students practice while
                                 watching video

                                 Students practice

                                 Repeat segment

                                 Exam or skills test

                                 Life Is Why™

Understanding   All AHA ECC Instructor Manuals include
Lesson Plans    Lesson Plans. The purposes of Lesson
                Plans are to
                    Help instructors facilitate ECC courses
                    Ensure consistency from course to
                    course
                    Keep instructors focused on the main
                    objectives for each lesson
                    Explain the instructor’s responsibilities
                    during the course
                      Lesson Plans are for use by instructors only.
                      See Figure 2 for a sample Lesson Plan.

Figure 2. Sample Lesson Plan.

Using Lesson          Use Lesson Plans before the course, during
Plans                 the course, and during skills practice.

                          When                How to Use
                       Before the      Review the Lesson Plans
                       course          to understand
                                          Objectives for each
                                          lesson
                                          Your role for each
                                          lesson
                                          Resources that you
                                          need for each lesson
                                       Make notes of things you
                                       want to remember or add.
                During the         Follow each Lesson
                course             Plan as you conduct
                                   the course.
                                   Remind students what
                                   they will see in each
                                   video segment.
                                   Make sure you have all
                                   the resources,
                                   equipment, and
                                   supplies ready for each
                                   lesson.
                                   Help the students
                                   achieve the objectives
                                   identified for each
                                   lesson.
                During          A student may have a
                practice        question about a certain
                before a        part of the course. The
                skills test     Lesson Plans serve as
                                the authoritative answer.

Assembling     The Heartsaver portfolio of courses provides
Lesson Plans   you with a great deal of flexibility as an
               instructor to efficiently meet the needs of
               your students. As a Heartsaver Instructor,
               you are able to teach a variety of Heartsaver
               courses from the portfolio as either
               standalone or as a combination. Please
               refer to the Portfolio Structure section in the
               Prepare tab of this Instructor Manual for the
               available Heartsaver courses that you can
               teach. Use the sample agendas and course
               outlines in this Instructor Manual to help
               organize your courses.
                  Assemble the Lesson Plans you’ll need
                  based on the courses you are teaching. For
                  example, if you are not teaching infant CPR,
                  you should take those Lesson Plans out and
                  include only the Lesson Plans you will use
                  for the course you are teaching.
                  To keep your Lesson Plans together during
                  each course, consider keeping them in a 3-
                  ring binder. Please take the time to review
                  the Lesson Plans before each course.

Teaching With a   The Heartsaver classroom courses and
Video             classroom portion of the Heartsaver blended
                  courses are video based. Many of the
                  lessons in the Heartsaver courses use the
                  practice-while-watching format. This means
                  that students practice skills as the video
                  guides them. To make sure that course
                  material is taught consistently and that
                  students benefit from the latest scientific
                  research, show all of the course’s video
                  lessons completely.

Practice While    The practice-while-watching method is used
Watching          to teach skills in the Heartsaver courses.
                  Practice while watching is an effective
                  approach for building skills mastery.
                  Practice while watching aids the learning
                  experience by organizing content into the
                  following format:
                      Tell students what they will learn
                      Show them
                        Allow them to practice
                        Provide coaching
                        Summarize what they learned
                    Instructors should use the video to
                    demonstrate correct performance of skills.
                    Allow students time to practice while
                    following the video demonstration. Observe
                    students’ performance of the skills and
                    provide corrective feedback. Finally, give
                    students the option to practice without the
                    video, if required.

Using the Student Each student must have the current
Workbook          Heartsaver Student Workbook readily
                    available for use before, during, and after
                    the course.
                    Students will need to do the following with
                    the Student Workbook:
                        Read it before coming to class
                        Bring it to class to use as a resource
                        during the exam
                        Refer to it after the course to maintain
                        knowledge
                    The AHA designed this workbook to
                    correspond with the course video. The
                    Lesson Plans tell you when to refer students
                    to specific sections of the Student
                    Workbook.
                    The Student Workbook is designed for
                    individual use and is an integral part of the
                    student’s education. Students may reuse
                   their workbooks during renewals or updates
                   until new science guidelines are published.
                   Students taking the eLearning course have
                   access to the appropriate Heartsaver
                   Student Workbook and other reference
                   materials within the eLearning course. They
                   may access the reference materials for up to
                   2 years from the date of key activation.
                   Students should be allowed to bring
                   electronic devices into the classroom to
                   access these electronic materials.

Importance of      High-quality CPR is the foundation of
High-Quality CPR   lifesaving resuscitation for cardiac arrest
                   victims.
                   Too often, CPR is not performed or is not
                   performed well by rescuers in all settings.
                   The foundation for CPR is the application of
                   continuous, effective chest compressions,
                   which should never be compromised. All
                   students are expected to perform CPR
                   effectively throughout the Heartsaver
                   course, which emphasizes the following
                   core principles:
                       Push hard (at least 5 cm in adolescents
                       and adults).
                       Push fast: Compress at a rate of 100 to
                       120/min.
                       Minimize interruptions in compressions
                       to less than 10 seconds.
                       Allow for complete chest recoil between
                       compressions.
                   Do not lean on the chest between
                   compressions.
                   Switch rescuers about every 2 minutes
                   or sooner to avoid fatigue.
                   Avoid excessive ventilation, delivering
                   breaths over 1 second that produce
                   visible chest rise.

Sample Course
Agendas         Sample Heartsaver CPR AED
                   Course Agenda With
                 Optional Lessons Included
                 12 Students, 2 Heartsaver Instructors
                 Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-
                            manikin ratio 3:1
                  Total time: Approximately 4½ hours

                 8:00-    Lesson 1: Course
                8:05       Introduction
                 8:05-    Lesson 1A: Life Is Why
                8:13       Activity (Optional)
                 8:13-    Lesson 2: Adult CPR
                9:08      Part I: Scene Safety and
                           Assessment
                          Part II: Chest Compressions
                          Part III: Giving Breaths
                           (Mouth-to-Mouth)
                          Part IV: Giving Breaths (With a
                           Mask)
                 9:08-    Lesson 3: Use an AED
                9:23       (Adult)
         Part I: AED
         Part II: Putting It All Together
 9:23-   Lesson 4: Help From Others
9:25
 9:25-   Lesson 5: Adult CPR AED
9:27      Summary
 9:27-   Lesson 6: Adult CPR and
9:47      AED Skills Test
 9:47-   Lesson 7: Naloxone
9:52
 9:52-   Lesson 8: Adult Choking
9:56
 9:56-   Break
10:11
10:11-   Lesson 1: Child CPR AED
10:16     Introduction
10:16-   Lesson 2: Child CPR
10:51    Part I: Scene Safety and
          Assessment
         Part II: Chest Compressions
         Part III: Giving Breaths
          (Mouth-to-Mouth)
         Part IV: Giving Breaths (With a
          Mask)
10:51-   Lesson 3: Use an AED
11:09     (Child)
         Part I: AED
         Part II: Putting It All Together
11:09-   Lesson 4: Help From Others
11:11
11:11-   Lesson 5: Child CPR AED
11:13     Summary
11:13-   Lesson 6: Child CPR Skills
11:25     Test
11:25-   Lesson 7: Child Choking
11:29
11:29-   Lesson 1: Infant CPR
11:31     Introduction
11:31-   Lesson 2: Infant CPR
12:03    Part I: Scene Safety and
          Assessment
         Part II: Chest Compressions
         Part III: Giving Breaths
          (Mouth-to-Mouth)
         Part IV: Giving Breaths (With a
          Mask)
         Part V: Putting It All Together
12:03-   Lesson 3: Infant CPR
12:05     Summary
12:05-   Lesson 4: Infant CPR Skills
12:17     Test
12:17-   Lesson 5: Infant Choking
12:22
12:22-   Lesson 6: Course
12:24     Conclusion

Sample Heartsaver First Aid
   Course Agenda With
Optional Lessons Included
12 Students, 2 Heartsaver Instructors
Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-
           manikin ratio 3:1
 Total time: Approximately 2¾ hours

 8:00-   Lesson 1: Course
8:02      Introduction
 8:02-   Lesson 1A: Life Is Why
8:10      Activity (Optional)
 8:10-   Lesson 2: First Aid Basics:
8:55      Duties and Key Steps
         Part I: Duties, Roles, and
          Responsibilities of First Aid
          Rescuers
         Part II: Universal Precautions
          and Exposure to Blood
         Part III: Removing Protective
          Gloves (Test)
         Part IV: Finding the Problem
          (Test)
 8:55-   Lesson 3: First Aid Basics
8:58      Summary
 8:58-   Lesson 4: Medical
9:23      Emergencies
         Part I: Breathing Problems
         Part II: Choking (if teaching
          First Aid only)
         Part III: Allergic Reactions
         Part IV: Using an Epinephrine
          Pen (Test)
         Part V: Heart Attack, Fainting,
          Diabetes and Low Blood
          Sugar, Stroke, and Seizure
 9:23-   Lesson 5: Medical
9:26      Emergencies Summary
 9:26-   Break
9:41
 9:41-   Lesson 6: Injury
10:11     Emergencies
         Part I: External Bleeding
         Part II: Controlling Bleeding
          and Bandaging (Test)
         Part III: Wounds
         Part IV: Internal Bleeding
         Part V: Head, Neck, and Spine
          Injuries
         Part VI: Broken Bones and
          Sprains
         Part VII: Burns and Electrical
          Injuries
10:11-   Lesson 7: Injury
10:13     Emergencies Summary
10:13-   Lesson 8: Environmental
10:38     Emergencies
         Part I: Bites and Stings
         Part II: Heat-Related
          Emergencies
         Part III: Cold-Related
          Emergencies
         Part IV: Poison Emergencies
10:38-   Lesson 9: Environmental
10:40     Emergencies Summary
10:40-   Lesson 10: Preventing
10:42     Illness and Injury; Legal
          Questions
10:42-   Lesson 11: Course
10:44     Conclusion

Sample Heartsaver First Aid
 CPR AED Blended Course
  Agenda With Optional
    Lessons Included
12 Students, 2 Heartsaver Instructors
Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-
           manikin ratio 3:1
 Total time: Approximately 2½ hours

 8:00-   Lesson 1: Course
 8:05     Introduction
 8:05-   Lesson 1A: Life Is Why
8:13      Activity (Optional)
 8:13-   Lesson 2: Adult CPR AED
8:33     Part I: Scene Safety and
          Assessment
         Part II: Chest Compressions
         Part III: Giving Breaths
         Part IV: Use an AED
         Part V: Putting It All Together
 8:33-   Lesson 3: Adult CPR and
8:53      AED Skills Test
 8:53-   Lesson 4: Child CPR AED
9:08     Part I: Scene Safety and
          Assessment
         Part II: Chest Compressions
         Part III: Giving Breaths
         Part IV: Use an AED
         Part V: Putting It All Together
 9:08-   Lesson 5: Child CPR Skills
9:20      Test
 9:20-   Lesson 6: Infant CPR
9:35     Part I: Scene Safety and
          Assessment
         Part II: Chest Compressions
         Part III: Giving Breaths
         Part IV: Putting It All Together
 9:35-   Lesson 7: Infant CPR Skills
9:47      Test
 9:47-   Break
10:02
10:02-   Lesson 8: Relief of Choking
10:04     in a Responsive Infant
10:04-   Lesson 9: First Aid
10:34    Part I: Removing Protective
          Gloves
         Part II: Finding the Problem
         Part III: Using an Epinephrine
          Pen
         Part IV: Controlling Bleeding
          and Bandaging
10:34-   Lesson 10: Course
10:36     Conclusion
           Testing and Remediation

Testing for Course Completion

Course         To receive a course completion card,
Completion     students must pass the following skills tests
Requirements   for each Heartsaver course:
                 Heartsaver CPR          Heartsaver First
                      AED                      Aid
                   Adult CPR and          First Aid Skills
                   AED Skills Test        Test
                   Child CPR Skills
                   Test (if teaching
                   Child CPR AED)
                   Infant CPR Skills
                   Test (if teaching
                   Infant CPR)

When to Give   You will test students as outlined in the
Tests          Lesson Plans.
                  The skills testing can be administered during
                  the course or at the end, at the discretion of
                  the instructor. Please refer to the Lesson
                  Plans for flexibility on when to administer
                  skills testing.
                  The exam, if required, is administered at the
                  conclusion of the Heartsaver course.

Exam (Optional)   The exam measures the mastery of
                  cognitive skills. Each student must score at
                  least 84% on the exam to meet course
                  completion requirements.
                  As part of the new education methodologies,
                  the AHA has adopted an open-resource
                  policy for exams administered online
                  through an eLearning course and in a
                  classroom-based course.
                  Open resource means that students may
                  use resources for reference while
                  completing the exam. Resources could
                  include the Student Workbook either in
                  printed form or as an eBook on personal
                  devices, any notes the student took during
                  the provider course, the ECC Handbook, the
                  2015 AHA Guidelines Update for CPR and
                  ECC, posters, etc. Open resource does not
                  mean open discussion with other students
                  or the instructor.
                  In the welcome letter sent to students with
                  their course materials, emphasize the
                  importance of their bringing their books to
                  class for use during the exam.
When you administer the exam in a
classroom-based course, remember that the
students may not interact with each other
during the exam. When a student completes
the exam, grade it and answer any
questions.
Students who scored less than 84% will
need immediate remediation.
During remediation, make sure that the
students understand why their answers
were incorrect.
If you need to provide remediation to a
student who did not pass the exam, you
must confirm knowledge acquisition and
understanding. That can be done by having
the student take a second exam, or by doing
a verbal remediation. If you give the student
a second exam, review the first exam with
the student, allowing time for the student to
study the questions he or she got wrong. If
you provide verbal remediation, ask the
student to verbally answer the questions
that he or she answered incorrectly, and
document on the answer sheet whether the
student correctly answered each question. It
needs to be documented on the answer
sheet that the remediation was successful
and that the student achieved a passing
score.
If you have a student who has difficulty
reading or understanding the written
questions, you may read the exam to the
student. You must read the exam as written
                     and in a manner that does not indicate the
                     correct answer. You may verbally translate
                     the exam if required.

Skills Testing       As part of the emphasis on better teaching
                     and learning, the AHA developed CPR skills
                     tests to ensure that there is a uniform and
                     objective approach for testing CPR skills.
                     The skills testing checklists help instructors
                     evaluate each student’s CPR skills. As a
                     result of the course design and skills tests,
                     the AHA expects that students in CPR
                     classes will learn more effectively and
                     instructors will work with students to achieve
                     higher levels of CPR skills competency.
                     CPR competency is critical to victim
                     survival. It is important that you use the
                     skills testing checklists to evaluate each
                     student’s performance and to ensure
                     consistent testing and learning across all
                     AHA Heartsaver courses. Your adherence to
                     these testing procedures will enhance the
                     CPR competency of your students.
                     You must keep a copy of completed skills
                     testing checklists for students who are
                     unsuccessful.

Using a Stopwatch To achieve accuracy during the skills
                     practice and testing, a stopwatch is used to
                     measure the rate of compressions. Follow
                     these rules when using a stopwatch:
                          Start your stopwatch when the student
                           first compresses the breastbone.
                           Stop your stopwatch at the end of the
                           30th compression.
                           Mark the step correct if the number of
                           seconds is between 15 and 18
                           seconds.

Using the Skills      Use the skills testing checklists to document
Testing Checklists    the student’s performance during the skills
and Critical Skills   testing portion of the course. The skills
Descriptors           testing checklist should be filled out while
                      the student is performing the skills. Use the
                      skills testing critical skills descriptors to
                      determine if a student has demonstrated
                      each step of the skill correctly.
                      If the student successfully completes a step,
                      place a check (✓) in the box to the right of
                      the step on the skills testing checklist.
                      If the student is unsuccessful, leave the box
                      next to the step blank on the skills testing
                      checklist. Circle the step under the critical
                      skills descriptor that the student did not
                      complete successfully.
                      If a student demonstrates each step of the
                      skills test successfully, mark the student as
                      passing that skills test on the skills testing
                      checklist. If a student does not receive
                      checks in all boxes, refer the student to the
                      remediation lesson at the end of the course
                      for further testing in that skill. Also, discuss
                      with the student the areas that you circled
                      on the skills testing critical skills descriptors
              and how to correctly perform each skill that
              was circled.
              You should be very familiar with all of the
              skills testing critical skills descriptors to be
              able to test Heartsaver skills correctly.

Retesting     If time permits during skills testing, you may
Students      retest a student 1 additional time if the
              student did not pass. If a student does not
              pass a skills test after the second attempt,
              work with the student during the remediation
              lesson at the end of the course and retest at
              that time. All additional retesting is done at
              the end of the course during the remediation
              lesson.
              In every retesting case, test the student on
              the entire skill.
              In some cases, you may defer retesting to a
              later time after the course. For example, if
              remediation is not successful, you might
              develop a plan of improvement and
              schedule retesting once the student
              completes the plan. If a student needs
              substantial additional remediation, you may
              recommend that the student repeat a
              Heartsaver course.

Remediation
Informal and   Remediation is a learning process in which
Formal         the instructor provides the student additional
Remediation    opportunities to master the required skills of
               the course.
               Remediation can be both informal and
               formal.

                Informal         The instructor coaches
                remediation      and corrects the student’s
                                 performance throughout
                                 the course as part of the
                                 learning process.
                Formal           After the student has
                remediation      been formally tested in
                                 concepts or skills and is
                                 unable to demonstrate
                                 mastery, the instructor
                                 reteaches and retests the
                                 student individually.

               Communicate with other instructors
               throughout the course to identify students
               who are having difficulty. Assist students
               during breaks, lunchtime, or at the end of
               the day to help them succeed with skills or
               better understand course concepts. This will
               help minimize the chances of having to
               formally provide remediation to students at
               the end of the course.
               After a skills test, a formal remediation
               should occur if all boxes on the skills testing
               checklist are not checked as complete.
               Show the student the skills testing checklist
              and discuss the area where the student was
              unsuccessful. Circle the step that the
              student had difficulty with on the critical
              skills descriptors. Discuss with the student
              the areas that you circled on the critical
              skills descriptors and how to correctly
              perform each skill that was circled.
              Answer any questions that the student has.
              Instruct the student to use the skills testing
              checklist, the critical skills descriptors, and
              the Student Workbook to review the
              particular skills that he or she missed. A
              manikin should be available for the student
              to practice, preferably away from other
              students, before retesting. When the student
              is ready, he or she should be retested, as
              time permits.

Steps to      If a student requires formal remediation,
Successful    communicate that information in a private,
Remediation   sensitive, and objective debriefing as soon
              as possible after the testing has taken place.
              Follow these steps to provide successful
              remediation:

               1    Be respectful, courteous, positive,
                    professional, and diplomatic when
                    performing remediation.
               2    Review the objectives for a particular
                    scenario or skills station with the
                    student.
               3    Give positive feedback when desired
                    actions are observed; ask open-
                       ended questions when nonpreferred
                       actions are observed to determine
                       the learner’s thought process.
                   4   Use the same scenario repeatedly, if
                       necessary, until the student
                       accomplishes the objectives.
                   5   Don’t assume that poor performance
                       is associated with a lack of
                       knowledge. There may be other
                       factors (eg, personal or work-related
                       issues) that are influencing the
                       student’s performance.
                   6   Instructor styles of facilitating and
                       student styles of learning may not
                       match; therefore, a change of
                       instructor may be necessary.
                   7   If an instructor has difficulty providing
                       successful remediation to a student,
                       the instructor may need to examine
                       his or her own style of remediation.

After the Course

Program        Ongoing evaluation and improvement of
Evaluation     AHA materials and instructors are important
               to the AHA. An opportunity to evaluate the
               class should be given to each student. As an
               instructor, it is your responsibility to provide
               that opportunity. There are several options
               for how a course evaluation can be
               provided.
                       A paper-and-pencil evaluation can be
                       used. A template is available on the
                       Instructor Network in multiple
                       languages. Make enough copies for all
                       of your students. Have them complete
                       the evaluation at the end of the course
                       and return it to you. Review the
                       feedback, and then send the completed
                       forms to your Training Center
                       Coordinator.
                       If you are an instructor with an
                       International Training Center, your
                       students will complete an evaluation
                       online before they can claim their
                       CPRverify™ certificate; in addition,
                       instructors can also have students
                       complete the paper evaluation provided
                       by the AHA.

Issuing Provider   Each student who successfully completes
Cards/eCards       AHA Heartsaver course completion
                   requirements is to be issued either an AHA
                   Heartsaver course completion card or an
                   AHA Heartsaver eCard. Only your Training
                   Center Coordinator can provide you with the
                   required cards or eCards. Check with your
                   Training Center Coordinator for the process
                   at your Training Center for obtaining and
                   issuing cards to your students.
                   By submitting your rosters or signing your
                   name as an assisting instructor, you are
                   verifying that those students have
                   successfully met all requirements for course
                   completion.
                   No AHA course completion card or eCard is
                   issued without hands-on manikin skills
                   practice and testing by an AHA-approved
                   computerized manikin as part of an AHA
                   eLearning course or by an AHA Heartsaver
                   Instructor.

Application for    Heartsaver online courses may offer
CE/CME             continuing education credit. Students can
                   claim credit after they have completed the
                   online portion of the course. Instructions for
                   claiming credit are provided upon
                   completion.

Heartsaver Student Renewal

Renewal Timeline   The current recommended timeline for
                   renewal of the Heartsaver course
                   completion card is every 2 years. The only
                   exception is the Bloodborne Pathogens
                   Course, which has a 1-year renewal interval,
                   as required by OSHA. Although there is
                   insufficient evidence to determine the
                   optimal method and timing of retaking the
                   Heartsaver course, research on skills
                   retention and training show the following:
                       There is growing evidence that
                       Heartsaver knowledge and skills decay
                       rapidly after initial training.
                       Studies have demonstrated the
                       deterioration of Heartsaver skills in as
                       little as months after initial training.
    Studies examining the effect of brief,
    more frequent training sessions
    demonstrated improvement in chest
    compression performance and shorter
    time to defibrillation.
    Studies also found that students
    reported improved confidence and
    willingness to perform CPR after
    additional or high-frequency training.
Given how fast Heartsaver skills decay after
training, and with the observed improvement
in skill and confidence among students who
train more frequently, students should be
encouraged to periodically review their
Student Workbooks and practice CPR and
AED skills whenever possible.
                    Additional Resources

Course Outlines

       Heartsaver Adult CPR AED Outline
          Approximate course duration: 1¾ hours
   (Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-manikin ratio 3:1)
Lesson times below are estimates and can vary from course to
                            course.

                                   Lesson Plan Actions and
 Lesso
               Course Event            Time Estimate
   n
                                        (in Minutes)
   1      Course Introduction

  1A      Life Is Why Activity
(option
  al)
2   Adult CPR
    Part I: Scene Safety and
     Assessment
    Part II: Chest
     Compressions
    Part III: Giving Breaths
     (Mouth-to-Mouth)
    Part IV: Giving Breaths
     (With a Mask)
3   Use an AED (Adult)
    Part I: AED
    Part II: Putting It All
     Together
4   Help From Others

5   Adult CPR AED
     Summary

6   Adult CPR and AED
     Skills Test

7   Naloxone

8   Adult Choking
   9     Course Conclusion

       Heartsaver Child CPR AED Outline
          Approximate course duration: 1½ hours
   (Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-manikin ratio 3:1)
Lesson times below are estimates and can vary from course to
                            course.

                                    Lesson Plan Actions and
 Lesso
              Course Event              Time Estimate
   n
                                         (in Minutes)
   1     Child CPR AED
          Introduction

   2     Child CPR
         Part I: Scene Safety and
          Assessment
         Part II: Chest
          Compressions
         Part III: Giving Breaths
          (Mouth-to-Mouth)
         Part IV: Giving Breaths
          (With a Mask)
   3     Use an AED (Child)
         Part I: AED
         Part II: Putting It All
          Together
   4     Help From Others

   5     Child CPR AED
          Summary

   6     Child CPR Skills Test

   7     Child Choking

   8     Course Conclusion

         Heartsaver Infant CPR Outline
            Approximate course duration: 1 hour
   (Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-manikin ratio 3:1)
Lesson times below are estimates and can vary from course to
                            course.

                                   Lesson Plan Actions and
 Lesso
              Course Event             Time Estimate
   n
                                        (in Minutes)
   1     Infant CPR
           Introduction
   2     Infant CPR
         Part I: Scene Safety and
           Assessment
         Part II: Chest
           Compressions
         Part III: Giving Breaths
           (Mouth-to-Mouth)
         Part IV: Giving Breaths
           (With a Mask)
         Part V: Putting It All
           Together
   3     Infant CPR Summary

   4     Infant CPR Skills Test

   5     Infant Choking

   6     Course Conclusion

           Heartsaver First Aid Outline
          Approximate course duration: 2½ hours
   (Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-manikin ratio 3:1)
Lesson times below are estimates and can vary from course to
                            course.
                                      Lesson Plan Actions and
Lesso
               Course Event               Time Estimate
  n
                                           (in Minutes)
  1       Course Introduction

  1A      Life Is Why Activity
(option
  al)
  2       First Aid Basics:
           Duties and Key Steps
          Part I: Duties, Roles,
           and Responsibilities of
           First Aid Rescuers
          Part II: Universal
           Precautions and
           Exposure to Blood
          Part III: Removing
           Protective Gloves
           (Test)
          Part IV: Finding the
           Problem (Test)
  3       First Aid Basics
           Summary

  4       Medical Emergencies
          Part I: Breathing
           Problems
          Part II: Choking (if
           teaching First Aid only)
          Part III: Allergic
           Reactions
    Part IV: Using an
     Epinephrine Pen (Test)
    Part V: Heart Attack,
     Fainting, Diabetes and
     Low Blood Sugar,
     Stroke, and Seizure
5   Medical Emergencies
     Summary

6   Injury Emergencies
    Part I: External Bleeding
    Part II: Controlling
      Bleeding and
      Bandaging (Test)
    Part III: Wounds
    Part IV: Internal
      Bleeding
    Part V: Head, Neck, and
      Spine Injuries
    Part VI: Broken Bones
      and Sprains
    Part VII: Burns and
      Electrical Injuries
7   Injury Emergencies
      Summary

8   Environmental
     Emergencies
    Part I: Bites and Stings
    Part II: Heat-Related
     Emergencies
    Part III: Cold-Related
     Emergencies
          Part IV: Poison
           Emergencies
   9      Environmental
           Emergencies
           Summary

  10      Preventing Illness and
           Injury; Legal
           Questions

  11      Course Conclusion

   Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED Blended
              Course Outline
          Approximate course duration: 2¼ hours
   (Student-instructor ratio 6:1; student-manikin ratio 3:1)
Lesson times below are estimates and can vary from course to
                            course.

                                   Lesson Plan Actions and
 Lesso
               Course Event            Time Estimate
   n
                                        (in Minutes)
   1      Course Introduction

  1A      Life Is Why Activity
(option
  al)
2   Adult CPR AED
    Part I: Scene Safety and
     Assessment
    Part II: Chest
     Compressions
    Part III: Giving Breaths
    Part IV: Use an AED
    Part V: Putting It All
     Together
3   Adult CPR and AED
     Skills Test

4   Child CPR AED
    Part I: Scene Safety and
     Assessment
    Part II: Chest
     Compressions
    Part III: Giving Breaths
    Part IV: Use an AED
    Part V: Putting It All
     Together
5   Child CPR Skills Test

6   Infant CPR
    Part I: Scene Safety and
      Assessment
    Part II: Chest
      Compressions
    Part III: Giving Breaths
    Part IV: Putting It All
      Together
   7       Infant CPR Skills Test

   8       Relief of Choking in a
            Responsive Infant

   9       First Aid
           Part I: Removing
            Protective Gloves
           Part II: Finding the
            Problem
           Part III: Using an
            Epinephrine Pen
           Part IV: Controlling
            Bleeding and
            Bandaging
   10      Course Conclusion

Skills Testing Checklists and Critical Skills
Descriptors

Understanding the Adult CPR and AED Skills Testing
Checklist

        Section                         How to Use
 Assessment and          The steps in this box do not have to be
 Activation              completed in a specific order; the student
                         only needs to complete all of the steps
                         before beginning compressions.
               Script
               Once the student shouts for help, the
               instructor should say, “Here’s the barrier
               device. I am going to phone the local
               emergency number and get the AED.”

Adult          During this section, evaluate the student’s
Compressions   ability to perform high-quality chest
               compressions. Feedback
               devices/manikins are optimal and are
               highly recommended to objectively
               evaluate chest compressions. Chest
               compressions should be initiated within
               10 seconds of recognition of cardiac
               arrest.
               Hand Placement
               Evaluate the student to ensure that the
               heel of one hand is on the lower half of
               the breastbone and that the heel of the
               other hand is on top of the first hand.
               Rate
               Compression rate should be evaluated by
               using a stopwatch. To achieve a rate of
               100 to 120 compressions per minute,
               students should deliver 30 compressions
               in 15 to 18 seconds.
               Depth and Recoil
               Evaluating depth and recoil in the
               absence of a feedback device or a
               manikin is unreliable. To increase the
               validity and reliability of the test, you can
               use commercial feedback devices or
               manikins that have the capability to
               objectively evaluate depth and recoil.
                High-fidelity manikins, with lights or an
                electronic display that indicates correct
                depth and recoil, are highly
                recommended. Manikins with a depth
                indicator that makes a clicking sound
                when compressions are deep enough are
                acceptable.
                Tip: To help students achieve adequate
                compression depth and to minimize
                fatigue, instruct them to perform chest
                compressions with their elbows locked
                and their shoulders over the manikin.
Adult Breaths   Breaths
                Breaths should be given with a barrier
                device, such as a pocket mask or face
                shield. You should test the student with
                the device they are most comfortable
                using.
                Each Breath Given Over 1 Second
                Students should open the manikin’s
                airway by using the head tilt–chin lift. The
                student should deliver 2 breaths. Each
                breath should be given over 1 second
                while the student observes for chest rise.
                Visible Chest Rise
                Students should deliver just enough air
                for visible chest rise.
                Tip: If students are having difficulty
                providing breaths, ensure they have a
                proper seal (if using a pocket mask) and
                that the airway is open. You might need to
                help students with their hand placement
                on the pocket mask so that they can get a
                proper seal.
                Minimizing Interruptions
                The time to deliver 2 breaths and resume
                chest compressions should be no more
                than 10 seconds.
Adult Cycle 2   Students should deliver another set of 30
                compressions and 2 breaths. Evaluate
                students with the same criteria as in
                Cycle 1.
Adult AED       Students should turn the AED on as
                required for their specific device; this may
                require the students to push the power
                button on the AED, or the AED may turn
                on automatically when the case is
                opened. Students should attach the AED
                pads to the manikin by following the
                pictures on the pads. Students should
                follow the prompts of the AED they are
                using. Instructors should be aware that
                some of the AED steps outlined on the
                skills testing checklist might not be
                completely applicable to all devices.
                Some AEDs require the patient to be
                cleared during the analysis and charging
                cycle, and some AEDs allow
                compressions to be continued while the
                device is charging. You should tailor the
                AED section of the skills testing checklist
                to the particular device. Once the AED is
                ready to deliver a shock, the student
                should clear the person both verbally and
                visually. Once everyone is clear, the
                student should press the shock button.
                Compressions should resume
                immediately.
                Note: An AED is not used in child or infant
                testing.
Adult Cycle 3   Evaluate the student with the same
                criteria for compressions as in Cycle 1.
                After the student delivers another set of
                30 compressions and 2 breaths, stop the
                test.
Test Results    If the student successfully performs all of
                the skills, circle “Pass” on the student’s
                skills testing checklist. If the student does
                not successfully perform all of the skills,
                circle “NR” for needs remediation. The
                instructor should retest (reevaluate) the
                student on the skills that were not
                performed correctly by using a new skills
                testing checklist. If remediation is
                required, both the skills testing checklist
                that indicated the need for remediation
                and the new skills testing checklist
                indicating that the student passed should
                be stored with the course records.
                Provide your initials, your instructor ID,
                and the date in the box at the end of the
                checklist.
Adult CPR and AED
Skills Testing Critical Skills Descriptors
1.   Assesses victim and activates emergency response
     system (this must precede starting compressions) within a
     maximum of 30 seconds. After determining that the scene
     is safe:
        Checks for responsiveness by tapping and shouting
        Shouts for help/directs someone to phone your local
        emergency number and get AED
        Checks for no breathing or no normal breathing (only
        gasping)
        – Scans from the head to the chest for a minimum of 5
           seconds and no more than 10 seconds
2.   Cycle 1: Performs high-quality chest compressions
     (initiates compressions immediately after recognition of
     cardiac arrest)
        Correct hand placement
        – Lower half of the breastbone
        – 2-handed (second hand on top of the first)
        Compression rate of 100 to 120/min
        – Delivers 30 compressions in 15 to 18 seconds
        Compression depth and recoil—at least 5 cm
        – Use of a commercial feedback device/manikin is highly
            recommended
        – Complete chest recoil after each compression
3.   Cycle 1: Provides 2 breaths by using a barrier device
       Opens airway adequately
       – Uses a head tilt–chin lift maneuver
       Delivers each breath over 1 second
       Delivers breaths that produce visible chest rise
       Avoids excessive ventilation
       Resumes chest compressions in less than 10 seconds
4.   Cycle 2: Performs same steps for compressions and
     breaths as in Cycle 1
5.   AED use
       Powers on AED
        – Turns AED on by pushing button or lifting lid as soon as it
          arrives
       Correctly attaches pads
        – Places proper-sized pads for victim’s age in correct
          location
       Clears for analysis
       – Clears rescuers from victim for AED to analyze rhythm
          (pushes analyze button if required by device)
       – Verbalizes and visually demonstrates to stay clear of the
          person
       Clears to safely deliver shock
       – Verbalizes and visually demonstrates to stay clear of the
          person
       Presses button to deliver a shock
       – Resumes chest compressions immediately after shock
          delivery
       – Does not turn off AED during CPR
6.   Cycle 3: Performs same steps for compressions and
     breaths as in Cycle 1

Understanding the Child CPR Skills Testing Checklist

        Section                          How to Use
Assessment and   The steps in this box do not have to be
Activation       completed in a specific order; the student
                 only needs to complete all of the steps
                 before beginning compressions.
                 Note: There will be no other rescuers, and
                 the student will have to phone the local
                 emergency number on his or her cell
                 phone. There will be no AED nearby.
Child            During this section, evaluate the student’s
Compressions     ability to perform high-quality chest
                 compressions. Feedback
                 devices/manikins are optimal and are
                 highly recommended to objectively
                 evaluate chest compressions.
                 Compressions should be initiated within
                 10 seconds of recognition of cardiac
                 arrest.
                 Hand Placement
                 Evaluate the student to ensure that the
                 heel of one hand is on the lower half of
                 the breastbone. If the student uses 2
                 hands, then the heel of the other hand is
                 on top of the first hand.
                 Rate
                 Compression rate should be evaluated by
                 using a stopwatch. To achieve a rate of
                 100 to 120 compressions per minute,
                 students should deliver 30 compressions
                 in 15 to 18 seconds.
                 Depth and Recoil
                 Evaluating depth and recoil in the
                 absence of a feedback device or manikin
                is unreliable. To increase the validity and
                reliability of your testing experience, you
                should use commercial feedback devices
                that have the capability to objectively
                evaluate depth and recoil. High-fidelity
                manikins, with lights that indicate depth
                and recoil or an electronic display of
                correct compression depth and recoil, are
                highly recommended. Manikins with a
                depth indicator that make a clicking
                sound when compressions are deep
                enough are acceptable.
                Tip: To help students achieve adequate
                compression depth and to minimize
                fatigue, instruct them to perform chest
                compressions with their elbows locked
                and their shoulders over the manikin.
Child Breaths   Breaths
                Breaths should be given with a barrier
                device, such as a pocket mask or face
                shield. You should test the student with
                the device they are most comfortable
                using.
                Each Breath Given Over 1 Second
                Students should open the manikin’s
                airway by using the head tilt–chin lift. The
                student should deliver 2 breaths. Each
                breath should be given over 1 second
                while the student observes for chest rise.
                Visible Chest Rise
                Students should deliver just enough air
                for visible chest rise.
                Tip: If students are having difficulty
                providing breaths, ensure they have a
                proper seal (if using a pocket mask) and
                that the airway is open. You might need to
                help students with their hand placement
                on the pocket mask so that they can get a
                proper seal.
                Minimizing Interruptions
                The time to deliver 2 breaths and resume
                chest compressions should be no more
                than 10 seconds.
Child Cycle 2   Students should deliver another set of 30
                compressions and 2 breaths. Evaluate
                students with the same criteria as in
                Cycle 1.
Child Cycle 3   Students should deliver another set of 30
                compressions and 2 breaths. Evaluate
                students with the same criteria as in
                Cycle 1.
                Script
                Once the student completes 30
                compressions and 2 breaths, the
                instructor should say, “EMS has arrived
                and is taking over.” Once you have
                completed saying the sentence above,
                stop the test.
Test Results    If the student successfully performs all of
                the skills, circle “Pass” on the student’s
                skills testing checklist. If the student does
                not successfully perform all of the skills,
                circle “NR” for needs remediation. The
                instructor should retest (reevaluate) the
                student on the skills that were not
performed correctly by using a new skills
testing checklist. If remediation is
required, both the skills testing checklist
that indicated the need for remediation
and the new skills testing checklist
indicating that the student passed should
be stored with the course records.
Provide your initials, your instructor ID,
and the date in the box at the end of the
checklist.
Child CPR
Skills Testing Critical Skills Descriptors
1.   Assesses victim and activates emergency response
     system (this must precede starting compressions) within a
     maximum of 30 seconds. After determining that the scene
     is safe:
        Checks for responsiveness by tapping and shouting
        Shouts for help and phones your local emergency number
        Checks for no breathing or no normal breathing (only
        gasping)
        – Scans from the head to the chest for a minimum of 5
           seconds and no more than 10 seconds
2.   Cycle 1: Performs high-quality chest compressions
     (initiates compressions immediately after recognition of
     cardiac arrest)
        Correct hand placement
        – Lower half of breastbone
        – 1- or 2-handed (second hand on top of the first)
        Compression rate of 100 to 120/min
        – Delivers 30 compressions in 15 to 18 seconds
        Compression depth and recoil—compress at least one third
        the depth of the chest, about 5 cm
        – Use of a commercial feedback device/manikin is highly
            recommended
        – Complete chest recoil after each compression
3.   Cycle 1: Provides 2 breaths by using a barrier device
       Opens airway adequately
       – Uses a head tilt–chin lift maneuver
       Delivers each breath over 1 second
       Delivers breaths that produce visible chest rise
       Avoids excessive ventilation
       Resumes chest compressions in less than 10 seconds
4.   Cycle 2: Performs same steps for compressions and
     breaths as in Cycle 1
5.   Cycle 3: Performs same steps for compressions and
     breaths as in Cycle 1

Understanding the Infant CPR Skills Testing Checklist

       Section                       How to Use
 Assessment and       The steps in this box do not have to be
 Activation           completed in a specific order; the student
                      only needs to complete all of the steps
                      before beginning compressions. There
                      will be no other rescuers, and the student
                      will have to complete 5 sets of 30
                      compressions and 2 breaths before
                      leaving to phone the local emergency
                      number. No AED will be nearby.
                      Script
                      Once the student shouts for help, the
                      instructor should say, “No one is around
                      to help.”
 Infant               During this section, evaluate the student’s
 Compressions         ability to perform high-quality chest
                      compressions. Feedback
                      devices/manikins are optimal and are
                      highly recommended to objectively
                      evaluate chest compressions.
                      Compressions should be initiated within
                      10 seconds of recognition of cardiac
                      arrest.
                      Finger Placement
                 Evaluate the student to ensure that finger
                 placement is in the center of the chest
                 and 2 fingers are placed just below the
                 nipple line.
                 Rate
                 Compression rate should be evaluated by
                 using a stopwatch. To achieve a rate of
                 100 to 120 compressions per minute,
                 students should deliver 30 compressions
                 in 15 to 18 seconds.
                 Depth and Recoil
                 Evaluating depth and recoil in the
                 absence of a feedback device or a
                 manikin is unreliable. To increase the
                 validity and reliability of your testing
                 experience, use commercial feedback
                 devices that have the capability to
                 objectively evaluate depth and recoil.
                 High-fidelity manikins, with lights or an
                 electronic display that indicates correct
                 depth and recoil, are highly
                 recommended. Manikins with a depth
                 indicator that makes a clicking sound
                 when compressions are deep enough are
                 acceptable.
Infant Breaths   Breaths, Cycle 1 (1-Rescuer CPR)
                 Breaths should be given with a barrier
                 device, such as a pocket mask or face
                 shield. You should test the student with
                 the device they are most comfortable
                 using.
                 Each Breath Given Over 1 Second
                  Students should open the manikin’s
                  airway by using the head tilt–chin lift. The
                  student should deliver 2 breaths. Each
                  breath should be given over 1 second
                  while the student observes for chest rise.
                  Visible Chest Rise
                  Students should deliver just enough air
                  for visible chest rise.
                  Tip: If students are having difficulty
                  providing breaths, ensure they have a
                  proper seal (if using a pocket mask) and
                  that the airway is open. You might need to
                  help students with their hand placement
                  on the pocket mask so that they can get a
                  proper seal.
                  Minimizing Interruptions
                  The time to deliver 2 breaths and resume
                  chest compressions should be no more
                  than 10 seconds.
Infant Cycle 2    Students should deliver another 30
                  compressions and 2 breaths. Evaluate
                  the students with the same criteria as in
                  Cycle 1.
Infant Cycle 3    Students should deliver another 30
                  compressions and 2 breaths. Evaluate
                  the students with the same criteria as in
                  Cycle 1.
Activates         Script
Emergency         Instructors should say, “You have just
Response System   completed 5 sets of 30 compressions and
                  2 breaths.”
               Students should verbalize that they are
               leaving to phone the local emergency
               number.
Test Results   If the student successfully performs all of
               the skills, circle “Pass” on the student’s
               skills testing checklist. If the student does
               not successfully perform all of the skills,
               circle “NR” for needs remediation. The
               instructor should retest (reevaluate) the
               student on the skills that were not
               performed correctly by using a new skills
               testing checklist. If remediation is
               required, both the skills testing checklist
               that indicated the need for remediation
               and the new skills testing checklist
               indicating that the student passed should
               be stored with the course records.
               Provide your initials, your instructor ID,
               and the date in the box at the end of the
               checklist.
Infant CPR
Skills Testing Critical Skills Descriptors
1.   Assesses infant and activates emergency response system
     (this must precede starting compressions) within a
     maximum of 30 seconds. After determining that the scene
     is safe:
        Checks for responsiveness by tapping and shouting
        Shouts for help
        Checks for no breathing or no normal breathing (only
        gasping)
        – Scans from the head to the chest for a minimum of 5
           seconds and no more than 10 seconds
2.   Cycle 1: Performs high-quality chest compressions
     (initiates compressions immediately after recognition of
     cardiac arrest)
        Correct placement of fingers in center of chest
        – 2 fingers just below the nipple line
        Compression rate of 100 to 120/min
        – Delivers 30 compressions in 15 to 18 seconds
        Compression depth and recoil—compress at least one third
        the depth of the chest, about 4 cm
        – Use of a commercial feedback device/manikin is highly
            recommended
        – Complete chest recoil after each compression
3.   Cycle 1: Provides 2 breaths by using a barrier device
       Opens airway adequately
       – Uses a head tilt–chin lift maneuver
       Delivers each breath over 1 second
       Delivers breaths that produce visible chest rise
       Avoids excessive ventilation
       Resumes chest compressions in less than 10 seconds
4.   Cycle 2: Performs same steps for compressions and
     breaths as in Cycle 1
5.   Cycle 3: Performs same steps for compressions and
     breaths as in Cycle 1

Understanding the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist

       Section                         How to Use
 Removing Gloves       The student must complete all steps in
                       this box in the order listed.
                       Script
                       The instructor tells the student, “EMS has
                       arrived and takes over. You may now
                       remove your gloves. Demonstrate what
                       you would do next.”
                       Grips One Glove
                       The student should remove the gloves by
                       gripping one glove on the outside, near
                       the cuff, and peeling it off, inside out. The
                       student should not touch the outside of
                       the gloves.
                       Cups the Inside-Out Glove
                       The student should cup the inside-out
                       glove with the gloved hand. The student
                       should not touch the outside of the
                       gloves.
                       Uses 2 Fingers
                       The student should use 2 fingers, from
                       the hand that is bare, to peel the second
                       glove off, with the first glove inside it. The
              student should not touch the outside of
              the gloves.
              Verbalizes the Need to Dispose of
              Gloves Properly
              The student should verbalize that he or
              she is disposing of the gloves properly.
Finding the   The student must complete all steps in
Problem       this box in the order listed.
              Script
              The instructor tells the student, “You find
              a coworker lying on the floor in the break
              room. There are a phone, first aid kit, and
              AED on the wall. Demonstrate how you
              would find the problem.”
              Verbalizes That the Scene Is Safe
              The student verbalizes that the scene is
              safe before proceeding.
              Taps and Shouts
              The student taps the manikin on the
              shoulders and speaks in a loud voice (eg,
              “Are you OK?”).
              Script
              The instructor tells the student, “The
              person is unresponsive.”
              Shouts for Help/Phones the local
              emergency number/Gets First Aid Kit
              and AED
              The student must tell someone to phone
              the local emergency response number
              and get an AED. The student must tell the
              bystander to perform both actions.
The student may say any phrase
indicating “the local emergency response
number” or may say the student’s specific
work-site emergency response number.
Checks Breathing
The student quickly checks the person for
no breathing or only gasping by scanning
the person’s body back and forth and
from the head to the chest for at least 5
seconds but no more than 10 seconds.
Script
The instructor tells the student, “The
person is breathing normally.”
Looks for Injury and Medical
Information Jewelry
The student looks quickly and scans the
manikin from head to toe, looking for
signs of injury. The student also
verbalizes checking the person for
medical identification jewelry. It is
acceptable for the student to visually
check for medical information jewelry at
the wrists and neck.
Script
The instructor tells the student, “The
person is not injured, and there is no
medical information jewelry.”
Verbalizes Staying With the Person
Until EMS Arrives
After performing all the steps for finding
the problem, the student needs to
                  verbalize that he or she will remain with
                  the person until advanced help arrives.
Using the         The student must complete all steps in
Epinephrine Pen   this box in the order listed.
                  Script
                  The instructor tells the student, “A
                  coworker has a severe allergic reaction,
                  has an epinephrine pen, and needs help
                  using it. You have completed all previous
                  steps and are now ready to use the
                  epinephrine pen. Demonstrate what you
                  would do next.”
                  Holds Epinephrine Pen in Fist
                  The student holds the epinephrine pen in
                  his or her fist while not touching either
                  end of the pen. Also, the student’s hands
                  or fingers are not over either end of the
                  pen.
                  Takes Off Safety Cap
                  The student removes the safety cap and
                  continues to hold the epinephrine pen
                  correctly, as described above. The
                  student continues to avoid having the
                  hands or fingers over either end.
                  Presses Epinephrine Pen Firmly
                  Against Outer Side of Thigh for 10
                  Seconds
                  The student presses the epinephrine pen
                  firmly against the outer side of the
                  person’s thigh, halfway between the hip
                  and knee, and holds the pen in place for
                  about 10 seconds. The student presses
                  with sufficient force to cause the
                    epinephrine pen to activate (the pen will
                    make a clicking sound).
                    Removes Epinephrine Pen
                    The student should remove the
                    epinephrine pen by pulling it straight out
                    from the leg.
                    Rubs Injection Site for 10 Seconds
                    The student should rub the outer side of
                    the person’s thigh, halfway between the
                    hip and knee, for 10 seconds. Once the
                    student has completed this step, stop the
                    test. There is no need for the student to
                    perform any additional steps.
Stopping Bleeding   The student must complete all steps in
and Bandaging       this box in the order listed.
                    Script
                    The instructor tells the student, “You will
                    demonstrate stopping bleeding and then
                    bandaging a small cut on the person’s
                    forearm. You have the first aid kit and are
                    now ready to begin.”
                    Tells Person to Place Pressure Over
                    the Cut With Clean Dressings
                    The student hands the dressings to the
                    injured person and has the person apply
                    pressure over the cut with clean
                    dressings while the student puts on
                    gloves.
                    Verbalizes Putting on Gloves
                    The student verbalizes putting on gloves.
                    Gloves are the only indicated/required
                    personal protective equipment for this
               test. It is acceptable for the student to
               actually wear the gloves.
               Applies Pressure to Bleeding Area
               The student places pressure on the
               dressings over the cut on the forearm.
               After about 15 seconds, the instructor
               tells the student, “The bleeding is not
               stopping.”
               Adds More Dressings and Presses
               Harder
               The student applies more clean dressings
               on top of the first and presses harder.
               Script
               The instructor tells student, “The bleeding
               has stopped.”
               Applies Bandages Over the Dressings
               The student uses a knot, tape, or similar
               method to secure the bandage. The
               bandage is placed over the dressings,
               and the student must simply hold the
               bandages in place.
Test Results   If the student successfully performs all of
               the skills, circle “Pass” on the student’s
               skills testing checklist. If the student does
               not successfully perform all of the skills,
               circle “NR” for needs remediation. The
               instructor should retest (reevaluate) the
               student on the skills that were not
               performed correctly by using a new skills
               testing checklist. If remediation is
               required, both the skills testing checklist
               that indicated the need for remediation
               and the new skills testing checklist
indicating that the student passed should
be stored with the course records.
Provide your initials, your instructor ID,
and the date in the box at the end of the
checklist.
Instructor Training and Renewal

Recruiting and      As a current AHA Instructor, you may have
Mentoring           students in your course who want to
Instructors         become an AHA Heartsaver or Basic Life
                    Support (BLS) Instructor. The AHA
                    encourages you to take a moment to pass
                    along the information below to all students
                    who are interested in becoming an instructor
                    after they successfully complete the provider
                    course.
                    An AHA Instructor course teaches the
                    methods required to effectively instruct
                    others in Heartsaver and BLS courses. The
                    AHA requires that instructors be at least 16
                    years of age to attend Heartsaver Instructor
                    and BLS Instructor courses.

Instructor          The ideal instructor candidate
Candidate               Is motivated to teach
Selection               Is motivated to facilitate learning
                        Is motivated to ensure that students
                        acquire the skills necessary for
                        successful course completion
                        Views student assessment as a way to
                        improve individual knowledge and skills

Instructor Course   Prospective participants in an AHA Instructor
Prerequisites       course must
                        Have current provider status in the
                        discipline they wish to teach
                        Have completed an Instructor
                        Candidate Application (obtained from
                        the Training Center Coordinator)

Maintaining         Your instructor status must be renewed by
Instructor Status   either a Training Center Faculty or Regional
                    Faculty. You can renew your status by
                    meeting all of the following criteria or by
                    successfully completing all requirements for
                    a new instructor.
                        Maintain current provider status. You
                        can do this by maintaining a current
                        provider card or by demonstrating
                        exceptional provider skills to a Training
                        Center Faculty or Regional Faculty and
                        by successfully completing the provider
                        exam.
                        If you choose the demonstration route,
                        successful completion must be
                        documented on the Instructor/Training
                        Center Faculty Renewal Checklist. A
                        new provider card may be issued at the
                        discretion of the Training Center or if
                        you request one, but it is not required
                        by the AHA.
                        Earn 4 credits every 2 years of your
                        instructor recognition by doing any
                        combination of the following:
                        – Teach the classroom portion for a
                            Heartsaver blended course. Each
                            session counts as 1 credit.
                        – Each day of Heartsaver skills
                            practice and testing sessions counts
                         as 1 credit.
                      – Conduct the classroom portion for a
                         blended-learning course. Each
                         HeartCode BLS classroom session
                         or each day of Heartsaver skills
                         practice and testing sessions counts
                         as 1 credit. All 4 credits can be
                         earned this way.
                      – Conduct BLS and AED skills testing
                         during a PALS, PEARS®, or ACLS
                         course. One credit is awarded per
                         course.
                      Attend updates as required within the
                      previous 2 years. Updates may address
                      new course content or methodology
                      and review Training Center, regional,
                      and national ECC information.
                      Be monitored while teaching before
                      instructor status expiration. The first
                      monitoring after the initial instructor
                      course does not satisfy this
                      requirement.

Issuing an        Your instructor card is issued by your
Instructor Card   Primary Training Center for that discipline.
                  That may not be the same Training Center
                  where you took your training or monitoring.
                  All instructor cards are issued for 2 years.
                  If you are a new instructor:
                       You must be monitored when teaching
                       your first course within 6 months of
                       completing the classroom portion of
    your training. A current Training Center
    Faculty for your discipline must monitor
    you teaching a provider course, or an
    update or renewal course. It is your
    responsibility to schedule this
    monitoring, working with the Training
    Center Faculty who conducted your
    course, or with the Training Center
    Coordinator of your Training Center.
    You will receive your instructor card
    from your Primary Training Center once
    you have successfully completed all
    monitoring requirements. The expiration
    date will be 2 years from the month you
    completed all requirements, including
    monitoring.
    You must register on the Instructor
    Network with your Primary Training
    Center so that you receive your
    instructor ID number. This number is
    placed on the back of your card, so you
    need it before your card can be issued.
    Any questions about receiving your
    instructor card should be directed to
    your Training Center Coordinator.
If you are an existing instructor:
     Your new instructor card will be issued
     by your Primary Training Center when
     you have completed and documented
     all renewal requirements. It is your
     responsibility to see that all
     requirements are met. If you believe
     that you will not be able to meet a
     requirement or will not be able to teach
                              the required number of classes, notify
                              your Training Center Coordinator before
                              your expiration date. There are times
                              when exceptions can be made or
                              extensions given. However, this is at
                              the discretion of your Training Center
                              Coordinator.
                              You must register on the Instructor
                              Network. It is a requirement that all
                              instructor cards have the instructor ID
                              number on the back, and that all
                              provider cards issued have the ID
                              number of the instructor listed.

CPR FAQs

Questions an Instructor Might Ask
Why do the courses teach compressions and breaths first?
Compressions are the most important skill of CPR. Studies have
shown that students mastered CPR skills best when they began by
practicing compressions and breaths, then the other skills, and then
put it all together.
Why don’t the lay rescuer courses teach jaw thrusts?
It’s difficult for lay rescuers to open the airway with a jaw thrust. To
make sure that the lay rescuer can open the airway, only head tilt–
chin lift is taught. In addition, all methods of opening the airway can
produce movement of an injured spine, so the jaw thrust may not be
any safer than head tilt–chin lift.
Why is the ratio 3 students to 1 manikin?
The 3:1 ratio is used to optimize the amount of time each student
practices with a manikin while also keeping the course length
reasonable.
Why don’t the lay courses teach students to reassess the
victim’s breathing?
Compressions are at the core of good CPR. Every time
compressions are interrupted, the first few compressions are not as
effective as later compressions. The more often the compressions
are interrupted, the lower the victim’s chance of survival.
Questions a Student Might Ask
Why don’t we teach AED for infants?
Cardiac arrest in infants is most often caused by a problem with
breathing that worsens over a short period of time. This means that
an AED is less likely to be effective in infants compared with adults.
Also, the 2015 AHA Guidelines Update for CPR and ECC
recommend a more advanced defibrillator than an AED. This more
advanced defibrillator is taught in more advanced courses. Although
an AED could be used for an infant, the science experts were
concerned with adding another level of knowledge to this course,
because infant cardiac arrest is fairly uncommon and because the
AED is much less likely to be required. For these reasons, this topic
is best left for more advanced courses.
Why isn’t there practice for adult and child choking?
Actions to assist a person who is choking cannot be safely
performed on other students in the classroom. Unfortunately, most
manikins used in the classroom are not suitable for effective
practice. Although we have included the choking practice before, it
likely does not prepare people for a choking emergency because it
cannot be practiced correctly in the classroom. Rather than practice
potentially incorrect techniques such as inadequate abdominal
thrusts and to avoid risk of harm to other students, the choking
practice was removed from the course.
Is there a specific place to tap a person when checking for a
response?
It doesn’t matter where the person is tapped. For consistency, we
teach tapping the shoulder of adults and children and tapping the
foot of infants.
Why are manikin shirts required?
Moving clothes out of the way is an essential part of CPR. Students
need to practice moving clothes out of the way.
Can I get into legal trouble if I don’t do CPR correctly?
Do CPR to the best of your ability. As long as you are trying to do the
right thing and you are not trying to hurt the victim, Good Samaritan
laws will protect you in most states.
I am afraid to give breaths without a mask. Should I just do
nothing if I don’t have a mask?
You might carry a mask with you. Some masks fold up very small
and fit on a key ring. If your job requires you to use a mask and you
don’t have one, do compressions until someone with a mask arrives.
Compressions alone are better than doing nothing.
Can I catch a disease such as hepatitis or AIDS by doing CPR?
CPR has been performed for 35 years, and there has never been a
case of transmission of these diseases from victim to rescuer.
When should I stop CPR?
Stop when
     The person starts to move
     Someone with more advanced training arrives and takes over
     You are too exhausted to continue or it is dangerous for you to
     continue, such as during an airplane landing (resume as soon
     as you can unfasten your seatbelt)

How do I give CPR to someone with an opening in the neck?
Some people have an opening that connects the airway directly to
the skin. This is called a stoma. If the person needs breaths, give
them directly into the stoma.
If I find a person on a bed, should I move her to the floor so that
I have a hard surface under her back?
If you can, quickly move the person to a firm surface to give CPR.
Make sure you support the head and neck. If you are alone and
can’t move the person, try to find something flat and firm. Slide it
under the back to provide a firm surface.
What should I do if the person has dentures?
Leave them in place if possible. If they get in the way of creating an
airtight seal, remove them.
Does the AHA endorse “cough CPR”?
No. “Cough CPR” doesn’t work if the person doesn’t respond. If you
think you or someone else is having a serious medical emergency,
phone your local emergency response number.
Why don’t we do a pulse check?
Even some healthcare providers have a hard time telling if there is a
pulse within 10 seconds. It is better to give CPR to a person who
has a pulse than to not give CPR to someone who needs it.
What should I do if the person vomits?
 1. Turn the person’s head to the side so the person doesn’t choke.
 2. Clear the mouth by sweeping it with a cloth or other material
    wrapped around your fingers.
 3. Reposition the person and resume CPR.

If I am choking and alone, what should I do?
Although there is no science to support this recommendation, a
person who is alone and choking may be able to give abdominal
thrusts to himself over a hard object such as the back of a chair.

Cardiac Arrest vs        People often use the terms cardiac arrest
Heart Attack             and heart attack interchangeably, but they
                         are not the same. As an instructor, it is
                         important to know the difference:
                             Cardiac arrest occurs when the heart
                            malfunctions and stops beating.
                            A heart attack occurs when blood flow
                            to one part of the heart is blocked and
                            the heart continues beating.

First Aid FAQs

Questions a Student Might Ask
Why does the tongue swell in a severe allergic reaction?
An allergic reaction causes the release of chemical mediators (such
as histamines) in the body. If the person experiences a severe
allergic reaction, he may experience symptoms such as swelling
(edema) of the tongue. Swelling of the face, neck, or tongue can
block the airway and make it difficult to breathe.
Why is it OK to do a head tilt–chin lift on a person who may
have a head, neck, or spine injury?
Someone who isn’t breathing won’t survive if you don’t give him
breaths. There are other methods of opening the airway, but they
also may move the head, neck, or spine, and the other methods may
not be as successful for opening the airway.
Why don’t you give anything by mouth to a person with
diabetes who isn’t responding?
If the person isn’t responding, she may choke.
Why do you put a knocked-out tooth in milk?
The following solutions have demonstrated efficacy at prolonging
dental cell viability from 30 to 120 minutes, and they may be
available to first aid providers: Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution
(containing calcium, potassium chloride and phosphate, magnesium
chloride and sulfate, sodium chloride, sodium bicarbonate, sodium
phosphate dibasic, and glucose), propolis, egg white, coconut water,
Ricetral, or whole milk.
Why is it best to have non-latex gloves in the first aid kit?
Some people are very allergic to latex. Some people don’t know they
are allergic to latex. Just putting on gloves releases latex into the air.
Suppose I don’t get any blood or body fluids on my gloves. Can
I reuse them?
No. You may not see any blood or body fluids on the gloves.
However, some may still be there. Remove and dispose of the
gloves properly.
How do I know whether bleeding is major or minor?
The most important action for bleeding you can see is to stop the
bleeding with pressure. If you see a lot of blood (a major cut), use
pressure to stop the bleeding. If the cut is not bleeding or is a small
abrasion, assume the cut is minor. Wash a minor cut with soap and
water before applying a bandage.
    Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED
                     Lesson Plans

Precourse

Instructor Tips
Prepare for your role as a Heartsaver Instructor well. Review all
course materials and anticipate questions or challenges that may
arise from students during the course. The time you invest in this
part of your preparation is important to the overall success of every
student.
Refer to “Part 2: Teaching the Course” in the Instructor Manual for
further instruction on using Lesson Plans.

30 to 60 Days Before the Course
  Determine course specifics, such as
  – Your class audience, including their professions and how the
    skills taught during this course will translate to their on-the-job
    performance
  – Number of participating students
 – Any special needs or equipment needed for the course
 Reserve all needed equipment to teach the course. Refer to “Part
 1: Preparing for the Course” in the Instructor Manual for a
 complete equipment list.
 Schedule a room that meets the room requirements for the
 Heartsaver course. Refer to “Part 1: Preparing for the Course” in
 the Instructor Manual for detailed requirements.
 Schedule additional instructors, if needed, depending on the size
 of the class.

At Least 3 Weeks Before the Course
 Send participating students precourse letters, student materials,
 and the course agenda.
 Confirm additional scheduled instructors, if needed.
 Research Good Samaritan laws that pertain to your area. This will
 help when answering student questions during the course.

Day Before the Course
 Confirm room reservations and that all required equipment
 needed is available for the course.
 Set up the room and make sure that all technology and
 equipment are working properly. This can also be done the day of
 the course if the room is not accessible the day before.
 Locate the nearest AED in the building and confirm the
 emergency response number.
 Coordinate the roles and responsibilities with additional
 instructors, if needed, to fulfill the course agenda and to ensure
 efficiency and timing of the course, per the course agenda.
 Ensure that all course paperwork is in order.

Day of the Course
Arrive at the course location in plenty of time to complete the
following:
  Make sure all equipment is working and has been cleaned
  according to manufacturer instructions.
  Have the video ready to play before students arrive and make
  sure it is working properly with sound.
  Distribute supplies to the students or set up supplies for students
  to collect when they arrive, with clear instructions on what they
  need.
  Greet students as they arrive to put them at ease, and direct them
  where to go.
  Make sure the course roster is completed by all students as they
  arrive for the course.

Instructor Notes
Adult CPR AED Lesson Plans
Lesson 1
Course Introduction                                       5 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Be familiar with the learning objectives and the Heartsaver course
 content. Knowing what you want to communicate, why it’s
 important, and what you want to happen as a result are critical to
 the success of the course.
 Think about how you want to manage breaks during the course.
 Making yourself available allows you to answer questions people
 might feel too embarrassed to ask in front of everyone. It also
 gives you time to establish rapport and get feedback.

          Discussion
             Introduce yourself and additional instructors, if
             present.
             Invite students to introduce themselves.
             – It is important to ask students at the beginning of
                 the class to provide information about their
                 occupations so you can tailor the class to best fit
                 their needs.
             Explain that the course is interactive. Refer to the
             following points (see detailed information for each
             throughout the Instructor Manual) for discussion with
             students:
             – Your role
             – Video-based learning
                  Use of scenarios
                  Practice while watching
        Refer to “Part 2: Teaching the Course” in the
        Instructor Manual for detailed information
        about practice while watching
– Use of the Student Workbook
– Exam (if required)
– Skills test
Ask that any student who anticipates difficulties with
the skills test due to personal limitations, such as a
medical concern or knee or back problems, speak
with one of the instructors. Refer to “Part 1: Preparing
for the Course” in the Instructor Manual for further
explanation about students with special needs.
Explain the layout of the building, including
bathrooms and emergency exits.
Remind students of where the nearest AED is located
and what their emergency response number is.
Describe the course agenda.
– Inform students of breaks you have scheduled
  during the class.
– Tell the students, “We are scheduled to end at
  _____.”
Remind students what they will learn during the
course. At the end of Heartsaver Adult CPR AED,
students will be able to
– Describe how high-quality CPR improves survival
– Explain the concepts of the Chain of Survival
– Recognize when someone needs CPR
– Perform high-quality CPR for an adult
– Describe how to perform CPR with help from
  others
              – Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or
                a mask
              – Demonstrate how to use an AED on an adult
              – Describe when and how to help a choking adult or
                child
              For further detail on the video and scenarios to be
              shown during the course, refer to the instructor-led
              training Heartsaver Adult CPR AED Outline in “Part 4:
              Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
              Remind students of the course completion
              requirements:
                   Skills Test               Optional Exam
                  Requirements
             Students must pass the     To pass the optional
             Adult CPR and AED          exam, students must
             Skills Test.               score at least 84%.

Instructor Notes

         Next

 Life Is Why Activity
 (Optional) or proceed
 to either the Adult CPR
 AED or First Aid
 Lesson Plans,
 depending on the
course you are
teaching
Lesson 1A
Life Is Why™ Activity (Optional)                            8 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Before facilitating this lesson, complete the Life Is Why activity in
 the Instructor Manual. Have your “______ Is Why” prepared to
 share with students.
 You can make additional copies of the Life Is Why activity from
 the Instructor Manual for students who do not bring their Student
 Workbook to class.

           Play Video
              Play the Life Is Why video.

           Discussion
              To engage the class, after viewing the Life Is Why
              video, take 2 to 3 minutes to share your Why with the
              class, based on your completed Life Is Why activity in
              the Instructor Manual
              Then, encourage students to participate in the
              following activity:
              – Have students find the “______ Is Why” page in
                  their Student Workbook and follow the directions.
                  Tell students:
                    Complete this activity by filling in the blank with
                    the word that describes your Why.
                    Tell your family and friends about your “______
                    Is Why,” and ask them to discover their Why.
             AHA Life Is Why Icon
              Tell students that throughout their Student Workbook,
              they will find information that correlates what they are
              learning in this course to Life Is Why and the
              importance of cardiovascular care. This information is
              identified by the Life Is Why heart-and-torch icon.
              Remind students that what they are learning today
              has an impact on the mission of the American Heart
              Association.

Instructor Notes

        Next

 Adult CPR
Lesson 2
Adult CPR                                                  55 minutes

Part I: Scene Safety and Assessment
Part II: Chest Compressions
Part III: Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
Part IV: Giving Breaths (With a Mask)

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Describe how high-quality CPR improves survival
   Explain the concepts of the Chain of Survival
   Recognize when someone needs CPR
   Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or a mask
   Perform high-quality CPR for an adult

Instructor Tips
  Practice while watching: Remind students that they will be
  practicing while watching a video segment, so that they will be
  prepared and know to get in place for the practice video segment.
  Feedback: When providing feedback to students who are
  practicing, remember to focus on what you do want rather than
  what you don’t want. Remember to always state feedback in a
  positive tone.
  Tell students to have their Student Workbook accessible during
  the course.
When concluding a practice-while-watching session, ask all
students if they are ready to move forward to the next skill or if
they would like to repeat practice while watching.
Familiarize yourself with all equipment that will be used in the
class and how to assemble it so that
– You know how to help students with the equipment during the
  course
– You are able to troubleshoot any problems with the equipment
Make sure not to interrupt the video if you have any comments to
add. Instead, write them down and discuss them at the end of the
video. Students do not learn well when they are trying to listen to
two things at once.

          Student Workbook
          Students can turn to “CPR and AED Use for Adults” in
          the Student Workbook to follow along.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
             Adult Chain of Survival
             – Cardiac arrest vs heart attack
             Scene Safety and Assessment

          Video Pauses
             Have students position themselves at the side of their
             manikins per the video instructions.
             Ask students to recall the steps of scene safety and
             assessment, and tell students they will now practice
             the scene safety and assessment sequence.
Practice While Watching: Scene
Safety and Assessment
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following actions. These actions can be
  completed in a different order, but this sequence is
  followed during the practice-while-watching segment.
  – Make sure the scene is safe.
  – Tap and shout (check for responsiveness).
  – Shout for help.
  – Phone your local emergency number and get an
     AED.
  – Check for normal breathing.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Chest Compressions

Video Pauses
  Have students position themselves at the side of their
  manikins per the video instructions.
  Tell students they will practice adult chest
  compressions and will complete 2 sets of 30
  compressions. Students need to count out loud while
  providing compressions.
Practice While Watching: Chest
Compressions
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Position yourself at the ill or injured person’s side.
  – Make sure the person is lying on his back on a
     firm, flat surface.
  – Quickly move clothes out of the way.
  – Put the heel of one hand on the center of the chest
    (over the lower half of the breastbone). Put your
    other hand on top of the first hand.
  – Push straight down at least 5 cm.
  – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
    minute. Count the compressions out loud.
  – Let the chest come back up to its normal position
    after each compression.
  – Try not to interrupt compressions for more than 10
    seconds, even when you give breaths.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  – Emphasize core concepts: correct hand
     placement; push hard, push fast; allow complete
     chest recoil.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
 – Head tilt–chin lift

Video Pauses
 Have students position themselves at the side of their
 manikins per the video instructions.
 Tell students they will practice giving breaths and will
 complete 3 sets of 2 breaths.
 – Ask students to take off lipstick and remove gum.

Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
 Students will follow along with the video to complete
 the following steps:
 – Put one hand on the forehead and the fingers of
   your other hand on the bony part of the chin.
 – Tilt the head back and lift the chin.
 – While holding the airway open, pinch the nose
   closed with your thumb and forefinger.
 – Take a normal breath. Cover the person’s mouth
   with your mouth.
 – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
   for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
   breath.
      Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
      10 seconds.
 Observe students and provide positive and corrective
 feedback on their performance.
 – Emphasize visible chest rise.
 – Have students open and reopen the airway if
   necessary.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Giving Breaths (With a Mask)

Video Pauses
  Have students position themselves at the side of their
  manikins per the video instructions.
  During the pause, ensure that students are able to
  use the proper hand technique for achieving a good
  seal of the mask on the face. Place the hand in a “C”
  position to achieve this.
  Tell students they will practice giving breaths and will
  complete 3 sets of 2 breaths.

Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths (With a Mask)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put the mask over the person’s mouth and nose.
       If the mask has a pointed end, put the narrow
       end of the mask on the bridge of the nose;
       position the wide end so it covers the mouth.
  – Tilt the head and lift the chin while pressing the
    mask against the person’s face. It is important to
    make an airtight seal between the person’s face
    and the mask while you lift the chin to keep the
    airway open.
             – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
               for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
               breath.
                  Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
                  10 seconds.
             Observe students and provide positive and corrective
             feedback on their performance.
             – Tell students they need to hold the mask firmly
                against the face.
             – Emphasize visible chest rise.
             Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
             times as needed for all students to complete the
             practice session.

Instructor Notes

         Next
 Use an AED (Adult)
Lesson 3
Use an AED (Adult)                                         15 minutes

Part I: AED
Part II: Putting It All Together

 Learning Objective
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Demonstrate how to use an AED on an adult

Instructor Tips
  When leading a discussion, ask your students open-ended
  questions that focus on their perspective to engage their minds
  and increase their participation.
  When answering a question, acknowledge the individual with eye
  contact, and then answer to the entire room, coming back to the
  questioner periodically.
  There may be multiple sets of pads (for an adult, child, or infant)
  supplied with the AED. The focus of this lesson is the use of an
  AED on an adult.

            Student Workbook
            Students can turn to the “Use an AED” section in “CPR
            and AED Use for Adults” in the Student Workbook to
            follow along.
Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  How to Use an AED
  AED Special Considerations
  – Has a hairy chest
  – Is immersed in water or water is covering the ill or
    injured person’s chest
  – Has an implanted defibrillator or pacemaker
  – Has a transdermal medication patch or other
    object on the surface of the skin where the AED
    pads are to be placed
  – Use of AED for infants and children less than 8
    years of age

Video Pauses: AED Review
During the pause, show students the AED trainer and
  Explain how to use the AED trainer
  Emphasize following the AED prompts
  Remind students that the AED trainer in class will not
  give a real shock
  Direct students to have the AED trainers accessible
  Tell students they are now going to practice using the
  AED

Students Practice: AED
  Lead students by teaching the following steps on how
  to use an AED. First show the steps while using your
  AED trainer, and then have students practice.

Instructions for Students
  Turn the AED on and follow the prompts.
  – Turn it on by pushing the “on” button or lifting the
    lid.
  – Follow the prompts, which will tell you everything
    you need to do.
  Attach the adult pads.
  – Use the adult pads for anyone 8 years of age and
     older.
  – Peel away the backing from the pads.
  – Following the pictures on the pads, attach them to
     the person’s bare chest.
  Let the AED analyze.
  – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
    touching the person.
  – The AED will analyze the heart rhythm.
  – If a shock is not needed, resume CPR.
  Deliver a shock if needed.
  – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
    touching the person.
  – Push the “shock” button.
  – Immediately resume CPR.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Putting It All Together (Adult CPR AED)

Video Pauses
  Tell students they will practice putting it all together
  by practicing scene safety and assessment, providing
  chest compressions, giving breaths (with a mask or
         mouth-to-mouth), and using an AED. Students will
         complete 2 cycles of 30 compressions and 2 breaths.
         – On the Adult CPR and AED Skills Test, you have
           the option to test students on giving breaths
           mouth-to-mouth or giving breaths with a mask.
           Have students practice the giving breaths skill that
           they will be tested on.
         Have students position themselves at the side of their
         manikins to begin practice. Students need to count
         out loud while providing compressions.

        Students Practice: Putting It All
        Together
         Lead students by teaching the steps of scene safety
         and assessment, adult compressions, giving breaths
         (with a mask or mouth-to-mouth), and using an AED.
         Refer to each skill in this Lesson Plan for detailed
         steps.
         Observe students and provide positive and corrective
         feedback on their performance.
         – Coach students on strengthening adult high-quality
           CPR.
         Repeat the practice segment as many times as
         needed for all students to complete the practice
         session.

Instructor Notes
       Next

Help From Others
Lesson 4
Help From Others                                             2 minutes

 Learning Objective
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Describe how to perform CPR with help from others

            Play Video
            The video will show and discuss
               Help From Others
               – How other people can help you provide high-
                 quality CPR
               – Switching rescuers and roles
                     Rescuers switch giving compressions about
                     every 2 minutes to avoid fatigue

Instructor Notes

          Next
 Adult CPR AED
 Summary
Lesson 5
Adult CPR AED Summary                                2 minutes

      Student Workbook
      Students can turn to “Putting It All Together: Adult High-
      Quality CPR AED Summary” in the Student Workbook
      for further review.

      Play Video
      The video will show and discuss
        Adult CPR AED Summary

      Discussion
      To prepare students for the Adult CPR and AED Skills
      Test, review the following questions with the class.
      Also encourage students to review their Adult CPR and
      AED Skills Testing Checklist.
        What are the steps for assessment?
        – Make sure the scene is safe.
        – Tap and shout.
        – Shout for help.
        – Check for breathing.
        What are the steps for phoning your local
        emergency number and getting an AED?
        – Phone your local emergency number and get an
          AED.
        – Provide CPR.
            – If you are alone, put your cell phone on speaker
              mode, phone your local emergency number, get
              an AED, and continue sets of 30 compressions
              and 2 breaths.
            What are some characteristics of high-quality
            CPR?
            – Do not lean on the chest.
            – Push down at least 5 cm.
            – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
              minute.
            – Let the chest come back up to its normal position.
            – Give breaths quickly and effectively without
              interrupting compressions for more than 10
              seconds.
          Allow students enough time for review and skills
          practice, if needed, before beginning the skills test.

Instructor Notes

        Next

 Adult CPR and AED
 Skills Test
Lesson 6
Adult CPR and AED Skills Test                            20 minutes

Instructor Tips
 For skills testing, it is important to be prepared and organized with
 student skills testing checklists. Review these before class, and
 have all materials ready to properly test students on every step.
 During skills testing, be efficient with the use of multiple
 instructors in the room, assigning each a different role, especially
 when there is a high volume of students in the classroom. This
 will ensure effective remediation, a smooth process, and
 efficiency for completing the class on time.
 Make sure students are provided a private setting for skills
 testing.

           Discussion
           Before the Adult CPR and AED Skills Test, read the
           following testing script aloud to the student (may be
           read to all students at once):
           “This test is like a realistic emergency situation: you
           should do whatever you think is necessary to save the
           victim’s life. You will have to determine for yourself what
           you need to do. For example, if you check the response
           on the manikin and there is no response, then you
           should do whatever you would do for a person who is
           not responding. I will read a short scenario to you, but I
           won’t be able to answer any questions. You can treat
           me like another rescuer who has arrived with you and
           tell me to do something to help you. If you make a
           mistake or forget to do something important, you should
           not stop. Just do your best to correct the error. Continue
doing what you would do in an actual emergency until I
tell you to stop. Do you have any questions before we
start?”

Skills Test
  Refer to the “Understanding the Adult CPR and AED
  Skills Testing Checklist” section and the critical skills
  descriptors for specific direction on how to test
  students on adult CPR and AED skills. These are
  found in “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the
  Instructor Manual.
  – Check off each skill as the student demonstrates
     competency per the critical skills descriptors.
  After starting, if the student asks any questions about
  the skills or sequences, you should not give him or
  her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do what you
  think is best right now.” If the student asks questions
  about what to do with the manikin, tell the student,
  “Check the manikin yourself and do what you think is
  needed to save a life.” If the student seems unsure,
  do your best to explain that he or she will be
  assessing the manikin and doing whatever is
  necessary.

Remediation
For students who need remediation, follow these steps
and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
  Determine where the students are having trouble
  during their Adult CPR and AED Skills Test.
  If needed, replay sections of video or practice skills to
  ensure learning.
  Retest skills as necessary.
            Some students may need additional practice or may
            need to repeat the course to demonstrate skills
            competency and to achieve a course completion
            card.

Instructor Notes

        Next
 Naloxone
Lesson 7
Naloxone                                               5 minutes

      Student Workbook
      Students can turn to “How to Help an Adult With an
      Opioid-Associated Life-Threatening Emergency” in the
      Student Workbook to follow along.

      Discussion
      Before playing the Naloxone video, inform students of
      the following:
           Opioids are prescription drugs used for pain relief but
           are often abused. A cause of cardiac arrest is opioid
           overdose.
           There is a safe and effective way to help someone
           with an opioid overdose. Naloxone is a medication
           used to reverse the effects of opioids and help the
           person to survive.
           For the purposes of this course, this information is
           being provided for public awareness, and it is based
           on the prevalence of deaths caused by opioid
           overdose.

      Play Video
      The video will show and discuss
           Naloxone

      Discussion
      Review the following questions with the class:
  What are some signs of opioid overdose?
  – Has a prescription for medication used for pain
    relief
  – Is unresponsive
  – Has slow or shallow breathing
  What actions do you take in an adult opioid-
  associated life-threatening emergency?
  – Check responsiveness by tapping and shouting.
  – Shout for help, and send someone to phone your
    local emergency number and get the naloxone and
    AED (if available).
  – Check breathing.
  – If there is no breathing or only gasping, begin
    CPR.
  – If no one comes to help after 5 cycles of CPR,
    leave to phone your local emergency number
    yourself and get the naloxone and AED (if
    available).
  – Give the naloxone right away, and then check
    again for responsiveness and breathing.
  – If the person is still unresponsive, continue CPR
    and use the AED.
  – Continue CPR until someone with more advanced
    training arrives or the person becomes responsive.

Additional Discussion (Optional)
This information can be shared with students if
questions arise or if further discussion is needed about
naloxone.
  What is naloxone? Naloxone is a synthetic drug that
  blocks the effects of opioids and reverses an
         overdose. Naloxone is safe and effective; emergency
         medical professionals have used it for decades.
         www.drugs.com/pro/naloxone.html
         How do I get naloxone? You can get naloxone from
         a primary care physician. In addition, substance-use
         treatment facilities, Veterans Administration
         healthcare systems, primary care clinics, and
         pharmacies have started providing naloxone to
         laypersons.
         www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6423
         a2.htm
         How do I become trained to use naloxone? A
         primary care physician or a facility that provides
         naloxone will be able to provide information on how
         to become trained to use naloxone.
         How do I administer naloxone? Bystanders can
         safely and legally spray naloxone into the nose or
         inject it into a muscle.
         – Into the nose (intranasal spray)
         – Into the muscle via an autoinjector (intramuscular
            injection)
         Can naloxone hurt me? No. Naloxone affects only
         people who have used opioids.
         Can I use naloxone for other drug overdoses? No.
         Naloxone is used only for opioid overdoses.

Instructor Notes
        Next

Adult Choking
Lesson 8
Adult Choking                                               4 minutes

Learning Objective
Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
  Describe when and how to help a choking adult or child

           Student Workbook
           Students can turn to “How to Help a Choking Adult,
           Child, or Infant” in the Student Workbook to follow
           along.

           Play Video
           The video will show and discuss
              Adult Choking
              – Relief of choking in a responsive adult
              – Relief of choking in an unresponsive adult

           Discussion
           Review adult choking with students by asking the
           following:
              What is the difference between mild and severe
              airway block?
              – Mild airway block: The person
                    Can talk or make sounds
                    Can cough loudly
          – Severe airway block: The person
                Cannot breathe, talk, or make sounds or
                Has a cough that has no sound or
                Makes the choking sign
          What is the universal sign for choking?
          – Holding the neck with one or both hands
          Where should you give thrusts for a severely
          choking adult?
          – Slightly above the belly button for abdominal
            thrusts
          – For a large or pregnant person: On the lower half
            of the breastbone for chest thrusts
          – For a person in a wheelchair: The thrusts would be
            performed in the same way as for a large or
            pregnant person
          Why is it important not to perform a blind finger
          sweep in a choking person?
          – The object could become lodged farther back in
            the airway.
        If students would like to practice their hand placement
        for abdominal thrusts for the relief of choking in an adult,
        students can place hands on themselves with your
        review or (optional) you can allow the students to
        practice hand placement on you.

Instructor Notes
If teaching additional topics, skip the course conclusion at this time
and go to the Child CPR AED, Infant CPR, or First Aid Lesson Plans.

          Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 9
Course Conclusion                                       2 minutes

Instructor Tips
 When summarizing what the course has covered, allow students
 to lead this discussion at times by asking 1 or 2 students
 (maximum, for class time efficiency) what they observed/learned
 during the course.
 During the summary and closing, provide students with clear
 direction on how they can further study and seek out additional
 resources provided by the AHA to help with postclassroom
 training.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
             Course Conclusion

          Discussion
          To conclude the course:
             Thank students for their participation.
             Summarize what students learned during the course.
             Refer to the Heartsaver course outlines found in “Part
             4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
             Make sure that students complete the evaluation
             form.

Instructor Notes
© 2016 American Heart Association
Child CPR AED Lesson Plans
Lesson 1
Child CPR AED Introduction                          5 minutes

       Discussion
         Describe the course agenda for Child CPR AED.
         – Inform students of breaks you have scheduled
           during this portion of the class.
         Remind students what they will learn in Child CPR
         AED. At the end of Heartsaver Child CPR AED,
         students will be able to
         – Describe how high-quality CPR improves survival
         – Explain the concepts of the Chain of Survival
         – Recognize when someone needs CPR
         – Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or
            a mask
         – Perform high-quality CPR for a child
         – Describe how to perform CPR with help from
            others
         – Demonstrate how to use an AED on a child
         – Describe when and how to help a choking adult or
            child
         For further detail on the video and scenarios to be
         shown during the course, refer to the instructor-led
         training Heartsaver Child CPR AED Outline in “Part 4:
         Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
         Remind students of the course completion
         requirements:
             Skills Test                Optional Exam
            Requirements
             Students must pass the   To pass the optional
             Child CPR Skills Test.   exam, students must
                                      score at least 84%.

Instructor Notes

        Next

 Child CPR
Lesson 2
Child CPR                                                  35 minutes

Part I: Scene Safety and Assessment
Part II: Chest Compressions
Part III: Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
Part IV: Giving Breaths (With a Mask)

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Describe how high-quality CPR improves survival
   Explain the concepts of the Chain of Survival
   Recognize when someone needs CPR
   Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or a mask
   Perform high-quality CPR for a child

Instructor Tips
  Practice while watching: Remind students that they will be
  practicing while watching a video segment, so that they will be
  prepared and know to get in place for the practice video segment.
  Feedback: When providing feedback to students who are
  practicing, remember to focus on what you do want rather than
  what you don’t want. Remember to always state feedback in a
  positive tone.
  Tell students to have their Student Workbook accessible during
  the course.
When concluding a practice-while-watching session, ask all
students if they are ready to move forward to the next skill or if
they would like to repeat practice while watching.
Familiarize yourself with all equipment that will be used in the
class and how to assemble it so that
– You know how to help students with the equipment during the
   course
– You are able to troubleshoot any problems with the equipment
Make sure not to interrupt the video if you have any comments to
add. Instead, write them down and discuss them at the end of the
video. Students do not learn well when they are trying to listen to
two things at once.
Consider asking the students how they would differentiate
between a child and an adult. For example:
– Facial, chest, and underarm hair in boys
– Breast development in girls

          Student Workbook
          Students can turn to “CPR and AED Use for Children” in
          the Student Workbook to follow along.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
            Pediatric Chain of Survival
            Scene Safety and Assessment

          Video Pauses
            Have students position themselves at the side of their
            manikins per the video instructions.
  Ask students to recall the steps of scene safety and
  assessment, and tell students they will now practice
  the scene safety and assessment sequence.

Practice While Watching: Scene
Safety and Assessment
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following actions. These actions can be
  completed in a different order, but this sequence is
  followed during the practice-while-watching segment.
  – Make sure the scene is safe.
  – Tap and shout (check for responsiveness).
  – Shout for help.
  – Check for breathing.
  – Begin CPR, phone your local emergency number,
    and get an AED.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Chest Compressions

Video Pauses
  Have students position themselves at the side of their
  manikins per the video instructions.
 Tell students they will practice child chest
 compressions and will complete 2 sets of 30
 compressions. Students need to count out loud while
 providing compressions.

Practice While Watching: Chest
Compressions
 Students will follow along with the video to complete
 the following steps:
 – Position yourself at the victim’s side.
 – Make sure the child is lying on his back on a firm,
   flat surface.
 – Quickly move clothes out of the way.
 – Use either 1 hand or 2 hands to give
   compressions.
      1 hand: Put the heel of one hand on the center
      of the chest (over the lower half of the
      breastbone).
      2 hands: Put the heel of one hand on the
      center of the chest (over the lower half of the
      breastbone). Put your other hand on top of the
      first hand.
 – Push straight down at least one third the depth of
   the chest, or about 5 cm.
 – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
    minute. Count the compressions out loud.
 – Let the chest come back up to its normal position
    after each compression.
 Observe students and provide positive and corrective
 feedback on their performance.
  – Emphasize core concepts: correct hand
    placement; push hard, push fast; allow complete
    chest recoil.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
  – Head tilt–chin lift

Video Pauses
  Have students position themselves at the side of their
  manikins per the video instructions.
  Explain what chest rise is and how to watch for it on
  the particular manikins you are using.
  Explain how to clean the manikin after each student
  practices, and ask students to take off lipstick and
  remove gum before giving breaths.
  Tell students they will practice giving breaths and will
  complete 3 sets of 2 breaths.

Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put one hand on the forehead and the fingers of
     your other hand on the bony part of the chin.
  – Tilt the head back and lift the chin.
  – While holding the airway open, pinch the nose
    closed with your thumb and forefinger.
  – Take a normal breath. Cover the child’s mouth with
    your mouth.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.
       Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
       10 seconds.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  – Emphasize visible chest rise.
  – Have students open and reopen the airway if
     necessary.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Giving Breaths (With a Mask)

Video Pauses
  Have students position themselves at the side of their
  manikins per the video instructions.
  During the pause, ensure that students are able to
  use the proper hand technique for achieving a good
  seal of the mask on the face. Place the hand in a “C”
  position to achieve this.
  Tell students they will practice giving breaths and will
  complete 3 sets of 2 breaths.
        Practice While Watching: Giving
        Breaths (With a Mask)
         Students will follow along with the video to complete
         the steps:
         – Put the mask over the child’s mouth and nose.
              If the mask has a pointed end, put the narrow
              end of the mask on the bridge of the nose;
              position the wide end so it covers the mouth.
         – Tilt the head and lift the chin while pressing the
           mask against the child’s face. It is important to
           make an airtight seal between the child’s face and
           the mask while you lift the chin to keep the airway
           open.
         – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
            for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
            breath.
         Observe students and provide positive and corrective
         feedback on their performance.
         – Tell students they need to hold the mask firmly
            against the face.
         – Instructors ensure that students use the proper
            hand technique to achieve a good seal of the
            mask on the face. Placing the hand in a “C”
            position will achieve this.
         – Emphasize visible chest rise.
         Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
         times as needed for all students to complete the
         practice session.

Instructor Notes
        Next
Use an AED (Child)
Lesson 3
Use an AED (Child)                                         18 minutes

Part I: AED
Part II: Putting It All Together

 Learning Objective
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Demonstrate how to use an AED on a child

Instructor Tips
  When leading a discussion, ask your students open-ended
  questions that focus on their perspective to engage their minds
  and increase their participation.
  When answering a question, acknowledge the individual with eye
  contact, and then answer to the entire room, coming back to the
  questioner periodically.
  There may be multiple sets of pads (for an adult, child, or infant)
  supplied with the AED. The focus of this lesson is the use of an
  AED on a child.

            Student Workbook
            Students can turn to the “Use an AED” section in “CPR
            and AED Use for Children” in the Student Workbook to
            follow along.
Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  How to Use an AED

Video Pauses: AED Review
During the pause, show students the AED trainer and
  Explain how to use the AED trainer
  Emphasize following the AED prompts
  Remind students that the AED trainer in class will not
  give a real shock
  Direct students to have the AED trainers accessible
  Tell students they are now going to practice using the
  AED
  – Remind students of AED special considerations:
       Is immersed in water or water is covering the ill
       or injured person’s chest
       Has an implanted defibrillator or pacemaker
       Has a transdermal medication patch or other
       object on the surface of the skin where the AED
       pads are to be placed
       Use of AED for infants and children less than 8
       years of age

Students Practice: AED
  Lead students by instructing the following steps on
  how to use an AED. First show the steps while using
  your AED trainer, and then have students practice.

Instructions for Students
  Turn the AED on and follow prompts.
  – Turn it on by pushing the “on” button or lifting the
    lid.
  – Follow the prompts, which will tell you everything
    you need to do.
  Attach the AED pads.
  – Use the child pads if the child is an infant to 8
     years old. If child pads are not available, use adult
     pads.
  – Use adult pads if the child is older than 8 years.
  – Peel away the backing from the pads.
  – Following the pictures on the pads, attach them to
     the child’s bare chest. Make sure the pads do not
     touch each other.
       On a small chest, if this causes the pads to
       overlap, consider placing one pad on the chest
       and one pad on the back.
  Let the AED analyze.
  – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
    touching the child.
  – The AED will analyze the heart rhythm.
  – If a shock is not needed, resume CPR.
  Deliver the shock if needed.
  – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
    touching the child.
  – Push the “shock” button.
  – Immediately resume CPR.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Putting It All Together (Child CPR AED)
        Video Pauses
         Tell students they will practice putting it all together
         by practicing scene safety and assessment, providing
         chest compressions, giving breaths (with a mask or
         mouth-to-mouth), and using an AED. Students will
         complete 2 cycles of 30 compressions and 2 breaths.
         – On the Child CPR Skills Test, you have the option
            to test students on giving breaths mouth-to-mouth
            or giving breaths with a mask. Have students
            practice the giving breaths skill that they will be
            tested on.
         Have students position themselves at the side of their
         manikins to begin practice. Students need to count
         out loud while providing compressions.

        Students Practice: Putting It All
        Together
         Lead students by teaching the steps of scene safety
         and assessment, child compressions, giving breaths
         (with a mask or mouth-to-mouth), and using an AED.
         Refer to each skill in this Lesson Plan for detailed
         steps.
         Observe students and provide positive and corrective
         feedback on their performance.
         – Coach students on strengthening child high-quality
            CPR.
         Repeat the practice segment as many times as
         needed for all students to complete the practice
         session.

Instructor Notes
       Next
Help From Others
Lesson 4
Help From Others                                             2 minutes

 Learning Objective
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Describe how to perform CPR with help from others

            Play Video
            The video will show and discuss
               Help From Others
               – How other people can help you provide high-
                 quality CPR
               – Switching rescuers and roles
                     Rescuers switch giving compressions about
                     every 2 minutes to avoid fatigue

Instructor Notes

          Next
 Child CPR AED
 Summary
Lesson 5
Child CPR AED Summary                                    2 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Make sure not to interrupt the video if you have any comments to
 add; write them down and discuss them at the end of the video.
 Students do not learn well when they are trying to listen to two
 things at once.

          Student Workbook
          Students can turn to “Putting It All Together: Child High-
          Quality CPR AED Summary” in the Student Workbook
          for further review.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
             Child CPR AED Summary

          Discussion
          To prepare students for the Child CPR Skills Test,
          review the following questions with the class.
          Also encourage students to review their Child CPR
          Skills Testing Checklist.
             What are the steps for assessment?
             – Make sure the scene is safe.
             – Tap and shout.
             – Shout for help.
             – Check for breathing.
             What are the steps for phoning your local
             emergency number and getting an AED?
             – Phone your local emergency number and get an
               AED.
             – Provide CPR.
             – If you are alone, put your cell phone on speaker
               mode, phone your local emergency number, get
               an AED, and continue sets of 30 compressions
               and 2 breaths.
             What are some characteristics of high-quality
             CPR?
             – Push down at about 5 cm.
             – Do not lean on the chest.
             – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
               minute.
             – Let the chest come back up to its normal position.
             – Give breaths quickly and effectively without
               interrupting compressions for more than 10
               seconds.
          Allow students enough time for review and skills
          practice, if needed, before beginning the skills test.

        Next

Child CPR Skills Test
Lesson 6
Child CPR Skills Test                                    12 minutes

Instructor Tips
 For skills testing, it is important to be prepared and organized with
 student skills testing checklists. Review these before class, and
 have all materials ready to properly test students on every step.
 During skills testing, be efficient with the use of multiple
 instructors in the room, assigning each a different role, especially
 when there is a high volume of students in the classroom. This
 will ensure effective remediation, a smooth process, and
 efficiency for completing the class on time.
 Make sure students are provided a private setting for skills
 testing.

           Discussion
           Before the Child CPR Skills Test, read the following
           testing script aloud to the student (may be read to all
           students at once):
           “This test is like a realistic emergency situation: you
           should do whatever you think is necessary to save the
           victim’s life. You will have to determine for yourself what
           you need to do. For example, if you check the response
           on the manikin and there is no response, then you
           should do whatever you would do for a person who is
           not responding. I will read a short scenario to you, but I
           won’t be able to answer any questions. You can treat
           me like another rescuer who has arrived with you and
           tell me to do something to help you. If you make a
           mistake or forget to do something important, you should
           not stop. Just do your best to correct the error. Continue
doing what you would do in an actual emergency until I
tell you to stop. Do you have any questions before we
start?”

Skills Test
  Refer to the “Understanding the Child CPR Skills
  Testing Checklist” section and the critical skills
  descriptors for specific direction on how to test
  students on child CPR skills. These are found in “Part
  4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
  – Check off each skill as the student demonstrates
     competency per the critical skills descriptors.
  After starting, if the student asks any questions about
  the skills or sequences, you should not give him or
  her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do what you
  think is best right now.” If the student asks questions
  about what to do with the manikin, tell the student,
  “Check the manikin yourself and do what you think is
  needed to save a life.” If the student seems unsure,
  do your best to explain that he or she will be
  assessing the manikin and doing whatever is
  necessary.

Remediation
For students who need remediation, follow these steps
and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
  Determine where the students are having trouble
  during their Child CPR Skills Test.
  If needed, replay sections of video or practice skills to
  ensure learning.
  Retest skills as necessary.
             Some students may need additional practice or may
             need to repeat the course to demonstrate skills
             competency and to achieve a course completion
             card.

Instructor Notes

         Next
 Child Choking
Lesson 7
Child Choking                                               4 minutes

Learning Objective
Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
  Describe when and how to help a choking adult or child

           Student Workbook
           Students can turn to “How to Help a Choking Adult,
           Child, or Infant” in the Student Workbook to follow
           along.

           Play Video
           The video will show and discuss
              Child Choking
              – Relief of choking in a responsive child
              – Relief of choking in an unresponsive child

           Discussion
           Review child choking with students by asking the
           following:
              Where should you give thrusts for a severely
              choking child?
              – Slightly above the belly button for abdominal
                thrusts
              – For a large child: Center of the chest for chest
                thrusts
                What is different about your body position when
                you give thrusts to a child vs when you give
                thrusts to an adult?
                – You may need to kneel to perform thrusts, because
                   of the size of the child.
             If students would like to practice their hand placement
             for abdominal thrusts for the relief of choking in a child,
             students can place hands on themselves with your
             review or (optional) you can allow the students to
             practice hand placement on you.

Instructor Notes

If teaching additional topics, skip the course conclusion at this time
and go to the Infant CPR or First Aid Lesson Plans.

           Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 8
Course Conclusion                                       2 minutes

Instructor Tips
 When summarizing what the course has covered, allow students
 to lead this discussion at times by asking 1 or 2 students
 (maximum, for class time efficiency) what they observed/learned
 during the course.
 During the summary and closing, provide students with clear
 direction on how they can further study and seek out additional
 resources provided by the AHA to help with postclassroom
 training.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
             Course Conclusion

          Discussion
          To conclude the course:
             Thank students for their participation.
             Summarize what students learned during the course.
             Refer to the Heartsaver course outlines found in “Part
             4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
             Make sure that students complete the evaluation
             form.

Instructor Notes
© 2016 American Heart Association
Infant CPR Lesson Plans
Lesson 1
Infant CPR Introduction                             2 minutes

       Discussion
         Describe the course agenda for Infant CPR.
         – Inform students of breaks you have scheduled
           during this portion of the class.
         Remind students what they will learn in Infant CPR.
         At the end of Heartsaver Infant CPR, students will be
         able to
         – Describe how high-quality CPR improves survival
         – Explain the concepts of the Chain of Survival
         – Recognize when someone needs CPR
         – Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or
            a mask
         – Perform high-quality CPR for an infant
         – Demonstrate how to help a choking infant
         For further detail on the video and scenarios to be
         shown during the course, refer to the instructor-led
         training Heartsaver Infant CPR Outline in “Part 4:
         Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
         Remind students of the course completion
         requirements:
              Skills Test                Optional Exam
             Requirements
        Students must pass the      To pass the optional
        Infant CPR Skills Test.     exam, students must
                                    score at least 84%.
Instructor Notes

        Next

 Infant CPR
Lesson 2
Infant CPR                                                 32 minutes

Part I: Scene Safety and Assessment
Part II: Chest Compressions
Part III: Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
Part IV: Giving Breaths (With a Mask)
Part V: Putting It All Together

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Describe how high-quality CPR improves survival
    Explain the concepts of the Chain of Survival
    Recognize when someone needs CPR
    Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or a mask
    Perform high-quality CPR for an infant

Instructor Tips
  Practice while watching: Remind students that they will be
  practicing while watching a video segment, so that they will be
  prepared and know to get in place for the practice video segment.
  Feedback: When providing feedback to students who are
  practicing, remember to focus on what you do want rather than
  what you don’t want. Remember to always state feedback in a
  positive tone.
  Tell students to have their Student Workbook accessible during
  the course.
When concluding a practice-while-watching session, ask all
students if they are ready to move forward to the next skill or if
they would like to repeat practice while watching.
Familiarize yourself with all equipment that will be used in the
class and how to assemble it so that
– You know how to help students with the equipment during the
   course
– You are able to troubleshoot any problems with the equipment
Make sure not to interrupt the video if you have any comments to
add. Instead, write them down and discuss them at the end of the
video. Students do not learn well when they are trying to listen to
two things at once.

          Student Workbook
          Students can turn to “CPR for Infants” in the Student
          Workbook to follow along.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
            Scene Safety and Assessment

          Video Pauses
            Have students position themselves at the side of their
            manikins per the video instructions.
            Ask students to recall the steps of scene safety and
            assessment.
            – You can ask students if they noticed that the facility
              in the dramatization did not have an AED. Remind
              students that if an AED is not available, you would
              begin high-quality CPR to give the infant the best
    chance of survival until help arrives or the infant
    responds.
  – Remind students that they will not practice or be
    tested on AED use in Infant CPR.
  Tell students they will now practice the scene safety
  and assessment sequence.

Practice While Watching: Scene
Safety and Assessment
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following actions. These actions can be
  completed in a different order, but this sequence is
  followed during the practice-while-watching segment.
  – Make sure the scene is safe.
  – Tap and shout (check for responsiveness).
  – Shout for help.
  – Check for breathing.
  – Begin CPR, phone your local emergency number,
     and get an AED.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Chest Compressions
Video Pauses
 Have students position themselves at the side of their
 manikins per the video instructions.
 Tell students they will practice infant chest
 compressions and will complete 2 sets of 30
 compressions. Students need to count out loud while
 providing compressions.

Practice While Watching: Chest
Compressions
 Students will follow along with the video to complete
 the following steps:
 – Position yourself at the victim’s side.
 – Make sure the infant is lying on his back on a firm,
    flat surface.
 – Quickly move clothes out of the way.
 – Use 2 fingers of one hand to give chest
    compressions. Place them on the breastbone, just
    below the nipple line.
 – Push straight down at least one third the depth of
    the chest, or about 4 cm.
 – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
   minute. Count the compressions out loud.
 – Let the chest come back up to its normal position
    after each compression.
 Observe students and provide positive and corrective
 feedback on their performance.
 – Emphasize core concepts: correct hand
   placement; push hard, push fast; allow complete
   chest recoil.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
  – Head tilt–chin lift

Video Pauses
  Have students position themselves at the side of their
  manikins per the video instructions.
  Tell students they will practice giving breaths and will
  complete 3 sets of 2 breaths.
  – Ask students to take off lipstick and remove gum.

Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put one hand on the forehead and the fingers of
     your other hand on the bony part of the chin.
  – Tilt the head back and lift the chin.
  – While holding the airway open, take a normal
     breath. Cover the infant’s mouth and nose with
     your mouth. If you have difficulty making an
     effective seal, try either a mouth-to-mouth or a
     mouth-to-nose breath.
       If you use the mouth-to-mouth technique, pinch
       the nose closed.
       If you use the mouth-to-nose technique, close
       the mouth.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.
       Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
       10 seconds.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  – Emphasize visible chest rise.
  – Have students open and reopen the airway if
     necessary.
  – Make sure students are careful not to overinflate
     the infant’s lungs when giving breaths.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Giving Breaths (With a Mask)

Video Pauses
  Have students position themselves at the side of their
  manikins per the video instructions.
  During the pause, ensure that students are able to
  use the proper hand technique for achieving a good
  seal of the mask on the face. Place the hand in a “C”
  position to achieve this.
  Tell students they will practice giving breaths and will
  complete 3 sets of 2 breaths.
Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths (With a Mask)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put the mask over the infant’s mouth and nose.
  – If the mask has a pointed end, put the narrow end
     of the mask on the bridge of the nose; position the
     wide end so it covers the mouth.
  – Tilt the head and lift the chin while pressing the
     mask against the infant’s face. It is important to
     make an airtight seal between the infant’s face and
     the mask while you lift the chin to keep the airway
     open.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.
       Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
       10 seconds.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  – Tell students they need to hold the mask firmly
     against the face.
  – Emphasize visible chest rise.
  Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
  times as needed for all students to complete the
  practice session.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Putting It All Together (Infant CPR)
        Video Pauses
         Tell students they will practice putting it all together
         by practicing scene safety and assessment, providing
         chest compressions, and giving breaths (with a mask
         or mouth-to-mouth). Students will complete 2 cycles
         of 30 compressions and 2 breaths.
         – On the Infant CPR Skills Test, you have the option
            to test students on giving breaths mouth-to-mouth
            or giving breaths with a mask. Have students
            practice the giving breaths skill that they will be
            tested on.
         Have students position themselves at the side of their
         manikins to begin practice. Students need to count
         out loud while providing compressions.

        Students Practice: Putting It All
        Together
         Lead students by teaching the steps of scene safety
         and assessment, infant compressions, and giving
         breaths (with a mask or mouth-to-mouth). Refer to
         each skill in this Lesson Plan for detailed steps.
         Observe students and provide positive and corrective
         feedback on their performance.
         – Coach students on strengthening infant high-
            quality CPR.
         Repeat the practice segment as many times as
         needed for all students to complete the practice
         session.

Instructor Notes
       Next
Infant CPR Summary
Lesson 3
Infant CPR Summary                                    2 minutes

       Student Workbook
       Students can turn to “Putting It All Together: Infant High-
       Quality CPR Summary” in the Student Workbook for
       further review.

       Play Video
       The video will show and discuss
         Infant CPR Summary

       Discussion
       To prepare students for the Infant CPR Skills Test,
       review the following questions with the class.
       Also encourage students to review their Infant CPR
       Skills Testing Checklist.
         What are the steps for assessment?
         – Make sure the scene is safe.
         – Tap and shout.
         – Shout for help.
         – Check for breathing.
         What are some characteristics of high-quality
         CPR?
         – Use 2 fingers of one hand to give compressions.
         – Push down about 4 cm.
         – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
           minute.
              – Let the chest come back up to its normal position.
              – Give breaths quickly and effectively without
                interrupting compressions for more than 10
                seconds.
                    When giving breaths, be careful not to
                    overinflate an infant’s lungs.
           Allow students enough time for review and skills
           practice, if needed, before beginning the skills test.

Instructor Notes

         Next

 Infant CPR Skills Test
Lesson 4
Infant CPR Skills Test                                   12 minutes

Instructor Tips
 For skills testing, it is important to be prepared and organized with
 student skills testing checklists. Review these before class, and
 have all materials ready to properly test students on every step.
 During skills testing, be efficient with the use of multiple
 instructors in the room, assigning each a different role, especially
 when there is a high volume of students in the classroom. This
 will ensure effective remediation, a smooth process, and
 efficiency for completing the class on time.
 Make sure students are provided a private setting for skills
 testing.

           Discussion
           Before the Infant CPR Skills Test, read the following
           testing script aloud to the student (may be read to all
           students at once):
           “This test is like a realistic emergency situation: you
           should do whatever you think is necessary to save the
           victim’s life. You will have to determine for yourself what
           you need to do. For example, if you check the response
           on the manikin and there is no response, then you
           should do whatever you would do for a person who is
           not responding. I will read a short scenario to you, but I
           won’t be able to answer any questions. You can treat
           me like another rescuer who has arrived with you and
           tell me to do something to help you. If you make a
           mistake or forget to do something important, you should
           not stop. Just do your best to correct the error. Continue
doing what you would do in an actual emergency until I
tell you to stop. Do you have any questions before we
start?”

Skills Test
  Refer to the “Understanding the Infant CPR Skills
  Testing Checklist” section and the critical skills
  descriptors for specific direction on how to test
  students on infant CPR skills. These are found in
  “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor
  Manual.
  – Check off each skill as the student demonstrates
     competency per the critical skills descriptors.
  After starting, if the student asks any questions about
  the skills or sequences, you should not give him or
  her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do what you
  think is best right now.” If the student asks questions
  about what to do with the manikin, tell the student,
  “Check the manikin yourself and do what you think is
  needed to save a life.” If the student seems unsure,
  do your best to explain that he or she will be
  assessing the manikin and doing whatever is
  necessary.

Remediation
For students who need remediation, follow these steps
and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
  Determine where the students are having trouble
  during their Infant CPR Skills Test.
  If needed, replay sections of video or practice skills to
  ensure learning.
  Retest skills as necessary.
              Some students may need additional practice or may
              need to repeat the course to demonstrate skills
              competency and to achieve a course completion
              card.

Instructor Notes

         Next
 Infant Choking
Lesson 5
Infant Choking                                               5 minutes

 Learning Objective
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Demonstrate how to help a choking infant

            Student Workbook
            Students can turn to “How to Help a Choking Adult,
            Child, or Infant” in the Student Workbook to follow
            along.

            Play Video
            The video will show and discuss
               Infant Choking
               – Relief of choking in a responsive infant
               – Relief of choking in an unresponsive infant

            Video Pauses
               Have students position themselves per the video
               instructions.
               Tell students they will practice the relief of choking on
               a responsive infant and will complete 1 set of 5 back
               slaps and 5 chest thrusts.
        Practice While Watching: Relief of
        Choking in a Responsive Infant
         Students will follow along with the video to complete
         the following steps:
         – Kneel or sit with the infant in your lap.
         – If it is easy to do, remove clothing from the infant’s
            chest.
         – Hold the infant facedown on your forearm. Support
            the infant’s head and jaw with your hand.
         – Give up to 5 back slaps with the heel of your other
           hand between the infant’s shoulder blades.
         – If the object does not come out after 5 back slaps,
           turn the infant onto his back, supporting the head.
         – Give up to 5 chest thrusts by using 2 fingers of
           your other hand to push on the chest in the same
           place you push during CPR.
         – Repeat giving 5 back slaps and 5 chest thrusts
           until the infant can breathe, cough, or cry or until
           he becomes unresponsive.
         Observe students and provide positive and corrective
         feedback on their performance.
         Repeat the practice-while-watching segment as many
         times as needed for all students to complete the
         practice session.

Instructor Notes
If teaching additional topics, skip the course conclusion at this time
and go to the First Aid Lesson Plans.

           Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 6
Course Conclusion                                       2 minutes

Instructor Tips
 When summarizing what the course has covered, allow students
 to lead this discussion at times by asking 1 or 2 students
 (maximum, for class time efficiency) what they observed/learned
 during the course.
 During the summary and closing, provide students with clear
 direction on how they can further study and seek out additional
 resources provided by the AHA to help with postclassroom
 training.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
             Course Conclusion

          Discussion
          To conclude the course:
             Thank students for their participation.
             Summarize what students learned during the course.
             Refer to the Heartsaver course outlines found in “Part
             4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
             Make sure that students complete the evaluation
             form.

Instructor Notes
© 2016 American Heart Association
First Aid Lesson Plans
Lesson 1
Course Introduction                                       2 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Be familiar with the learning objectives and the Heartsaver course
 content. Knowing what you want to communicate, why it’s
 important, and what you want to happen as a result are critical to
 the success of the course.
 Think about how you want to manage breaks during the course.
 Making yourself available allows you to answer questions people
 might feel too embarrassed to ask in front of everyone. It also
 gives you time to establish rapport and get feedback.

          Discussion
             Introduce yourself and additional instructors, if
             present.
             Invite students to introduce themselves.
             – It is important to ask students at the beginning of
                 the class to provide information about their
                 occupations so you can tailor the class to best fit
                 their needs.
             Explain that the course is interactive. Refer to the
             following points (see detailed information for each
             throughout the Instructor Manual) for discussion with
             students:
             – Your role
             – Video-based learning
                  Use of scenarios
                  Practice while watching
        Refer to “Part 2: Teaching the Course” in the
        Instructor Manual for detailed information
        about practice while watching.
– Use of the Student Workbook
– Exam (if required)
– Skills test
Ask that any student who anticipates difficulties with
the skills test due to personal limitations, such as a
medical concern or knee or back problems, speak
with one of the instructors. Refer to “Part 1: Preparing
for the Course” in the Instructor Manual for further
explanation about students with special needs.
Explain the layout of the building, including
bathrooms and emergency exits.
Remind students of where the nearest AED is located
and what their emergency response number is.
Describe the course agenda.
– Inform students of breaks you have scheduled
   during the class.
– Tell the students, “We are scheduled to end at
   _____.”
Remind students what they will learn during the
course. At the end of the Heartsaver First Aid Course,
students will be able to
– List the priorities, roles, and responsibilities of first
   aid rescuers
– Describe the key steps in first aid
– Remove protective gloves (skill student will
  demonstrate)
– Find the problem (skill student will demonstrate)
 – Describe the assessment and first aid actions for
   the following life-threatening conditions: heart
   attack, difficulty breathing, choking, severe
   bleeding, shock, and stroke
 – Use an epinephrine pen (skill student will
   demonstrate)
 – Control bleeding and bandaging (skills student will
   demonstrate)
 – Recognize elements of common injuries
 – Recognize elements of common illnesses
 – Describe how to find information on preventing
   illness and injury
 – Recognize the legal questions that apply to first aid
   rescuers
 For further detail on the video and scenarios to be
 shown during the course, refer to the instructor-led
 training Heartsaver First Aid Outline in “Part 4:
 Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
 Remind students of the course completion
 requirements:
     Skills Test                 Optional Exam
    Requirements
Students must pass the      To pass the optional
First Aid Skills Test.      exam, students must
                            score at least 84%.
Instructor Notes

          Next
 Life Is Why Activity
 (Optional)
Lesson 1A
Life Is Why™ Activity (Optional)                            8 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Before facilitating this lesson, complete the Life Is Why activity in
 the Instructor Manual. Have your “______ Is Why” prepared to
 share with students.
 You can make additional copies of the Life Is Why activity from
 the Instructor Manual for students who do not bring their Student
 Workbook to class.

           Play Video
              Play the Life Is Why video.

           Discussion
              To engage the class, after viewing the Life Is Why
              video, take 2 to 3 minutes to share your Why with the
              class, based on your completed Life Is Why activity in
              the Instructor Manual.
              Then, encourage students to participate in the
              following activity:
              – Have students find the “______ Is Why” page in
                  their Student Workbook and follow the directions.
                  Tell students:
                    Complete this activity by filling in the blank with
                    the word that describes your Why.
                    Tell your family and friends about your “______
                    Is Why,” and ask them to discover their Why.
            AHA Life Is Why Icon
               Tell students that throughout their Student Workbook,
               they will find information that correlates what they are
               learning in this course to Life Is Why and the
               importance of cardiovascular care. This information is
               identified by the Life Is Why heart-and-torch icon.
               Remind students that what they are learning today
               has an impact on the mission of the American Heart
               Association.

Instructor Notes

          Next
 First Aid Basics: Duties
 and Key Steps
Lesson 2
First Aid Basics: Duties and Key
Steps                                                        45 minutes

Part I: Duties, Roles, and Responsibilities of First Aid
Rescuers
Part II: Universal Precautions and Exposure to Blood
Part III: Removing Protective Gloves (Test)
Part IV: Finding the Problem (Test)

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    List the priorities, roles, and responsibilities of first aid rescuers
    Describe the key steps in first aid
    Remove protective gloves (skill student will demonstrate)
    Find the problem (skill student will demonstrate)

Instructor Tips
  Pass out gloves, epinephrine pen, gauze for bandaging, and
  splinting supplies (optional) to all students.
  When students have to rotate roles to demonstrate a skill, make
  sure they have space during practice that allows you to clearly
  observe and monitor student performance.
  Feedback: When providing feedback to students who are
  practicing, remember to focus on what you do want rather than
  what you don’t want. Remember to always state feedback in a
  positive tone.
Tell students to have their Student Workbook accessible during
the course.
When concluding a practice session, ask all students if they are
ready to move forward to the next skill or if they would like to
repeat the practice.
Make sure not to interrupt the video if you have any comments to
add. Instead, write them down and discuss them at the end of the
video. Students do not learn well when they are trying to listen to
two things at once.
For skills testing, it is important to be prepared and organized with
student skills testing checklists. Review these before class, and
have all materials ready to properly test students on every step.

          Student Workbook
          Students can turn to “Part 1: First Aid Basics” in the
          Student Workbook to follow along.

          Discussion
          If you are teaching First Aid only, inform students of the
          following before playing the video:
             The video begins with an overview of CPR to give
             you an awareness of the steps. The reason for the
             overview is because there are incidences when
             delivering first aid that could quickly turn into cardiac
             arrest. Providing this information in the First Aid
             Course will enable you to act if needed. It is
             recommended to take a Heartsaver CPR AED course
             to learn more about CPR and AED use and be able
             to save a life if the situation calls for more action.
Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Duties, Roles, and Responsibilities of First Aid
  Rescuers
  Introduction to CPR AED (will be covered if teaching
  First Aid only and not a CPR AED course)
  – Key Steps of First Aid
       Assess the Scene
       Phoning for Help

Video Pauses
  During the pause, tell students to turn to the “Phone
  for Help” section in the Student Workbook and write
  down their emergency response number.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Universal Precautions and Exposure to Blood
  Removing Protective Gloves
  – Washing Hands

Video Pauses
  Have students put on their gloves.
  Tell students they will practice removing protective
  gloves.
  – Remind students that they will be tested on the
     skill of removing protective gloves, and to refer to
     their skills testing checklist as guidance to prepare
     and during the practice.
        Students will not be tested on washing hands.

Students Practice: Removing
Protective Gloves
  Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
  complete the following steps:
  – Grips one glove on the outside, near the cuff, to
    peel it off
  – Cups the inside-out glove with the gloved hand
  – Places 2 fingers of the bare hand inside the cuff to
    peel the second glove off, with the first glove
    inside it
  – Verbalizes the need to dispose of gloves properly
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
  – Emphasize core concepts: Make sure that
     students do not touch the outside of gloves with
     their bare hands.
  Repeat the practice session as many times as
  needed for all students to complete the practice
  session or for additional practice, as needed, to
  prepare for testing.

Test: Removing Protective Gloves
Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
direction on how to test students on first aid skills. This
is found in “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the
Instructor Manual.
  For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
  the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
  Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
  Do not demonstrate skills or coach during the skills
  test. After starting, if the student asks any questions
  about the skills or sequences, you should not give
  him or her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do
  what you think is best right now.”
  Determine where the student is having trouble during
  the Removing Protective Gloves skills test.
  For students who need remediation, follow the steps
  on the remediation Lesson Plan.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Finding the Problem

Video Pauses
  Have students pair up. Assign one student to play the
  person who is breathing but is not responding and
  the other to play the role of the rescuer.
  Tell students they will practice finding the problem
  and to use their skills testing checklist for guidance.
  – Remind students to say “I’m now putting on
     gloves” out loud per the step on their skills testing
     checklist.

Students Practice: Finding the
Problem
  Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
  complete the following steps:
  – Verbalizes that the scene is safe
  – Taps and shouts
  – Shouts for help/Phones your local emergency
    number/Gets first aid kit and AED
  – Checks for breathing
  – Looks for injury and medical information jewelry
  – Verbalizes that he or she will stay with the person
    until EMS arrives
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.

Repeat Segment
  Have students switch roles and repeat the practice.
  Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all
  students to complete the practice session or for
  additional practice, as needed, to prepare for testing.

Test: Finding the Problem
Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
direction on how to test students on first aid skills. This
is found in “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the
Instructor Manual.
  For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
  the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
  Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
  Do not demonstrate skills or coach during the skills
  test. After starting, if the student asks any questions
  about the skills or sequences, you should not give
  him or her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do
  what you think is best right now.”
  Determine where the student is having trouble during
  the Finding the Problem skills test.
               For students who need remediation, follow the steps
               on the remediation Lesson Plan.

            Play Video
            The video will show and discuss
               Optimal Position for an Ill or Injured Person

Instructor Notes

          Next
 First Aid Basics
 Summary
Lesson 3
First Aid Basics Summary                               3 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Encourage students to write down answers to review questions in
 their Student Workbook to use as a reference.

          Student Workbook
          Students can turn to “First Aid Basics: Review
          Questions” in the Student Workbook for further review.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
            First Aid Basics Summary

          Discussion
          Review the following questions with the class:
            What should you wear when you are providing
            first aid?
            – Personal protective equipment
            How long should you stay on the line with the
            dispatcher?
            – Until the dispatcher tells you to hang up
            How long should you wash your hands?
            – At least 20 seconds

Instructor Notes
       Next
Medical Emergencies
Lesson 4
Medical Emergencies                                        25 minutes

Part I: Breathing Problems
Part II: Choking (if teaching First Aid only)
Part III: Allergic Reactions
Part IV: Using an Epinephrine Pen (Test)
Part V: Heart Attack, Fainting, Diabetes and Low Blood
Sugar, Stroke, and Seizure

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Describe the assessment and first aid actions for the following
    life-threatening conditions: heart attack, difficulty breathing,
    choking, severe bleeding, shock, and stroke
    Use an epinephrine pen (skill student will demonstrate)

            Student Workbook
            Students can turn to “Part 2: Medical Emergencies” in
            the Student Workbook to follow along.

            Play Video
            The video will show and discuss
               Breathing Problems
               – Asthma
                     Assembling and Using an Inhaler
         Shake the medicine canister
         Put the medicine canister into the
         mouthpiece
         Remove the cap from the mouthpiece
         Attach a spacer if there is one available and
         if you know how
         To help someone use an inhaler, ask him to
         tilt his head back slightly and breathe out
         slowly
 – How to Help Someone With Breathing Problems
 Choking (will be covered if teaching First Aid only and
 not a CPR AED course)
 Allergic Reactions
 Using an Epinephrine Pen

Video Pauses
 Have students pair up. Assign one student to play the
 person who is having a severe allergic reaction and
 the other to play the role of the rescuer.
 Explain the epinephrine pen trainer to students.
 Tell students they will practice using an epinephrine
 pen and to use their skills testing checklist for
 guidance.

Students Practice: Using an
Epinephrine Pen
 Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
 complete the following steps:
 – Holds epinephrine pen in fist
 – Takes off safety cap
   – Presses epinephrine pen firmly against outer side
     of thigh for 10 seconds
   – Removes epinephrine pen
   – Rubs injection site for 10 seconds
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.

Repeat Segment
  Have students switch roles and repeat the practice.
  Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all
  students to complete the practice session or for
  additional practice, as needed, to prepare for testing.

Test: Using an Epinephrine Pen
Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
direction on how to test students on first aid skills. This
is found in “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the
Instructor Manual.
  For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
  the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
  Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
  Do not demonstrate skills or coach during the skills
  test. After starting, if the student asks any questions
  about the skills or sequences, you should not give
  him or her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do
  what you think is best right now.”
  Determine where the student is having trouble during
  the Using an Epinephrine Pen skills test.
  For students who need remediation, follow the steps
  on the remediation Lesson Plan.
          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
            Heart Attack
            Fainting
            Diabetes and Low Blood Sugar

          Video Pauses
            During the pause, ask students if they have any
            questions or observations about topics just discussed
            in the video.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
            Stroke
            Seizure
             – Bleeding From the Mouth

Instructor Notes

        Next
 Medical Emergencies
 Summary
Lesson 5
Medical Emergencies Summary                         3 minutes

      Student Workbook
      Students can turn to “Medical Emergencies: Review
      Questions” in the Student Workbook for further review.

      Play Video
      The video will show and discuss
        Medical Emergencies Summary

      Discussion
      Review the following questions with the class:
        What are some typical signs of a heart attack?
        – Chest discomfort
        – Pain or discomfort in other areas of the body
            One or both arms, the back, neck, jaw, or
            stomach
        – Other
              Shortness of breath with or without chest
              discomfort, cold sweat, nausea, light-
              headedness
        What are some signs of low blood sugar?
        – Irritable or confused, hungry, thirsty, weak, sleepy,
          or sweaty
        What are the warning signs of a stroke?
             – Face drooping: Does one side of the face droop or
               is it numb?
             – Arm weakness: Is one arm weak or numb?
             – Speech difficulty: Is speech slurred?
             – Time to phone your local emergency number: If
               someone shows any of these symptoms

Instructor Notes

         Next
 Injury Emergencies
Lesson 6
Injury Emergencies                                         30 minutes

Part I: External Bleeding
Part II: Controlling Bleeding and Bandaging (Test)
Part III: Wounds
Part IV: Internal Bleeding
Part V: Head, Neck, and Spine Injuries
Part VI: Broken Bones and Sprains
Part VII: Burns and Electrical Injuries

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Control bleeding and bandaging (skills student will
    demonstrate)
    Recognize elements of common injuries
    Recognize elements of common illnesses

Instructor Tips
  The splinting practice of the lesson is optional. Allow students to
  practice this skill if it meets the needs of their occupation, which
  can be determined during the course introduction.

            Student Workbook
            Students can turn to “Part 3: Injury Emergencies” in the
            Student Workbook to follow along.
Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  External Bleeding
  Controlling Bleeding and Bandaging

Video Pauses
  Have students pair up. Assign one student to play the
  person who has an injury on the forearm and the
  other to play the rescuer.
  Tell students they will practice controlling bleeding
  and bandaging and to use their skills testing checklist
  for guidance.

Students Practice: Controlling
Bleeding and Bandaging
  Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
  complete the following steps:
  – Tells person to place pressure over cut with clean
    dressing
  – Verbalizes putting on gloves
  – Applies pressure to bleeding area
  – Adds more dressings and presses harder
  – Applies more bandages over the dressing
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.

Repeat Segment
  Have students switch roles and repeat the practice.
  Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all
  students to complete the practice session or for
  additional practice, as needed, to prepare for testing.

Test: Controlling Bleeding and
Bandaging
Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
direction on how to test students on first aid skills. This
is found in “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the
Instructor Manual.
  For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
  the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
  Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
  Do not demonstrate skills or coach during the skills
  test. After starting, if the student asks any questions
  about the skills or sequences, you should not give
  him or her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do
  what you think is best right now.”
  Determine where the student is having trouble during
  the Controlling Bleeding and Bandaging skills test.
  For students who need remediation, follow the steps
  on the remediation Lesson Plan.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  External Bleeding continued
   – Using Tourniquets
   – Shock
Video Pauses
  During the pause, ask students if they have any
  questions or observations about topics just discussed
  in the video.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Wounds
  – Bleeding From the Nose
  – Tooth Injuries
  – Eye Injuries
  – Penetrating and Puncturing Injuries
  – Amputation

Video Pauses
  During the pause, ask students if they have any
  questions or observations about topics just discussed
  in the video.

Play Video
The video will show and discuss
  Internal Bleeding
  Head, Neck, and Spine Injuries
  Broken Bones and Sprains
  – Splinting

Video Pauses
  During the pause, ask students if they have any
  questions or observations about topics just discussed
  in the video.
  If practicing splinting, follow the directions below.

Students Practice: Splinting
(Optional)
For student practice, you can use rolled-up towels,
magazines, and pieces of wood as splints. Be sure
students also have tape, gauze, or cloth for practice.
  Have students pair up. Assign one student to play the
  person who is injured and the other to play the
  rescuer. Students will complete the following steps:
   – Cover any broken skin with a clean or sterile cloth,
     and tie or tape the splint to the injured limb so that
     it supports the injured area.
   – Use tape, gauze, or cloth to secure it. It should fit
     snugly but not cut off circulation.
        If students are using a hard splint, such as
        wood, make sure they pad it with something
        soft, such as clothing or a towel.
  Observe students and provide positive and corrective
  feedback on their performance.
   – Emphasize core concepts: The splint should be
     longer than the injured area and should support
     the joints above and below the injury.
  Have students switch roles and repeat the practice as
  many times as needed for all students to complete
  the practice session.
          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
            Burns and Electrical Injuries

        Next

Injury Emergencies
Summary
Lesson 7
Injury Emergencies Summary                          2 minutes

       Student Workbook
       Students can turn to “Injury Emergencies: Review
       Questions” in the Student Workbook for further review.

       Play Video
       The video will show and discuss
         Injury Emergencies Summary

       Discussion
       Review the following questions with the class:
         What are some signs of shock?
         – Feeling weak, faint, or dizzy
         – Feeling nauseated or thirsty
         – Having pale or grayish skin
         – Being restless, agitated, or confused
         – Being cold and clammy to the touch
         What are some signs of a concussion?
         – Feeling stunned or dazed, headache, nausea or
           vomiting, dizziness, unsteadiness (trouble with
           balance), double vision or flashing lights,
           confusion and loss of memory of events that
           happened before or after the injury
         What are the only things you should put on a
         burn?
             – Cool water and clean dressings

Instructor Notes

        Next
 Environmental
 Emergencies
Lesson 8
Environmental Emergencies                                  25 minutes

Part I: Bites and Stings
Part II: Heat-Related Emergencies
Part III: Cold-Related Emergencies
Part IV: Poison Emergencies

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Recognize elements of common injuries
   Recognize elements of common illnesses

            Student Workbook
            Students can turn to “Part 4: Environmental
            Emergencies” in the Student Workbook to follow along.

            Play Video
            The video will show and discuss
               Bites and Stings
               – Animal and Human Bites
               – Snakebites
               – Bee Stings and Insect and Spider Bites
               – Poisonous Spider Bites and Scorpion Stings
               – Tick Bites
          – Marine Bites and Stings

        Video Pauses
          During the pause, ask students if they have any
          questions or observations about topics just discussed
          in the video.

        Play Video
        The video will show and discuss
          Heat-Related Emergencies
          – Dehydration
          – Heat Cramps
          – Heat Exhaustion
          – Heat Stroke

        Video Pauses
          During the pause, ask students if they have any
          questions or observations about topics just discussed
          in the video.

        Play Video
        The video will show and discuss
          Cold-Related Emergencies
          – Frostbite
          – Low Body Temperature (Hypothermia)
          Poison Emergencies

Instructor Notes
       Next

Environmental
Emergencies Summary
Lesson 9
Environmental Emergencies
Summary                                                2 minutes

       Student Workbook
       Students can turn to “Environmental Emergencies:
       Review Questions” in the Student Workbook for further
       review.

       Play Video
       The video will show and discuss
         Environmental Emergencies Summary

       Discussion
       Review the following questions with the class:
         What are some key actions to help a person who
         has a bite or sting from a marine animal?
         – Wipe off stingers or tentacles with a gloved hand
           or towel.
         – If the sting is from a jellyfish, rinse the injured area
           for at least 30 seconds with lots of vinegar (an
           alternative is a baking soda and water solution).
         – Put the part of the body that was stung in hot
           water.
         What are some signs of dehydration?
         – Weakness, thirst, dry mouth, dizziness, confusion,
           or less urination than usual
         What are the signs of hypothermia?
              – Skin that is cool to the touch
              – Shivering
              – Confusion
              – Personality change
              – Sleepiness
              – Stiff, rigid muscles

Instructor Notes

         Next

 Preventing Illness and
 Injury; Legal Questions
Lesson 10
Preventing Illness and Injury;
Legal Questions                                              2 minutes

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Describe how to find information on preventing illness and
   injury
   Recognize the legal questions that apply to first aid rescuers

            Play Video
            The video will show and discuss
               Preventing Illness and Injury
               Legal Questions

Instructor Notes

          Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 11
Course Conclusion                                       2 minutes

Instructor Tips
 When summarizing what the course has covered, allow students
 to lead this discussion at times by asking 1 or 2 students
 (maximum, for class time efficiency) what they observed/learned
 during the course.
 During the conclusion, be sure to provide students with clear
 direction on how they can further study and seek out additional
 resources provided by the AHA to help with postclassroom
 training.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
             Course Conclusion

          Discussion
          To conclude the course:
             Thank students for their participation.
             Summarize what students learned during the course.
             Refer to the Heartsaver course outlines found in “Part
             4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
             Make sure that students complete the evaluation
             form.

Instructor Notes
Exam (Optional)                                         Time varies

Instructor Tips
 The Heartsaver exam is not required for all students—only those
 who request to take the exam for workplace requirements. Make
 sure you are aware of which students need to take the Heartsaver
 exam before class. The exam will need to cover all sections
 taught during the course.
 During testing and remediation, be efficient with the use of
 multiple instructors in the room, assigning each a different role,
 especially when there is a high volume of students in the
 classroom. This will ensure effective remediation, a smooth
 process, and efficiency for completing the class on time.
 For the exam, make sure that students are provided an
 environment conducive to testing: quiet with minimal distractions
 and plenty of time to complete the exam.

           Discussion
           Give students the following instructions for the exam:
              Tell students not to write on the exam.
              Students may not cooperate or talk to each other
              during the exam.
              Exams are open resource, and students are allowed
              to use the Student Workbook and any other
              accessible resources while taking the exam. Refer to
              “Part 3: Testing and Remediation” in the Instructor
              Manual for details about open-resource exams.

           Exam
              Distribute answer sheets and exams.
          As students complete the exam, collect their exams
          and begin to grade them.
          Regardless of their score, all students should be
          given their exam results and be allowed the
          opportunity to review and ask questions.

        Remediation
        For students who need remediation, follow these steps
        and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
          Students who scored less than 84% need immediate
          remediation.
          Provide remediation by giving a second exam or by
          having students verbally answer each item they got
          incorrect, showing understanding of incorrect items.
          Upon successful remediation, students should show
          an improvement in being able to provide correct
          responses and an understanding of the correct
          response.

Instructor Notes
Remediation                                              Time varies

Part I: Skills Testing Remediation
Part II: Exam Remediation

Instructor Tips
  The formal remediation lesson is facilitated if a student did not
  successfully pass the exam or skills testing during the course.
  For further detail on remediation and retesting students, refer to
  “Part 3: Testing and Remediation” in the Instructor Manual.
  As an instructor, you will need to determine which section of the
  course the student is having trouble with.

            Play Video: Skills Testing
            Remediation
               Replay scenarios, instruction, and/or practice-while-
               watching segments of the video as needed to ensure
               learning and for the student to have additional
               practice.
               Repeat practice until the student feels comfortable
               and is ready to move forward with the exam or skills
               test.
               – Some students may need additional practice or
                  may need to repeat the course to demonstrate
                  skills competency and to achieve a course
                  completion card.
               Formal remediation should occur if all boxes on the
               skills testing checklist are not checked as complete.
Skills Test
 Retest Heartsaver skills as necessary by using the
 skills testing checklists. Refer to the skills testing
 Lesson Plans for additional instructions on
 administering the skills tests.

Exam
 Students who scored less than 84% need immediate
 remediation and will need to retake the exam. Refer
 to the exam Lesson Plan for additional instructions on
 how to administer the exam.
  – Provide remediation by giving a second exam or
    by having students verbally answer each item they
    got incorrect, showing understanding of incorrect
    items.
  – Upon successful remediation, students should
    show an improvement in being able to provide
    correct responses and an understanding of the
    correct response.
  – Make sure that students are given their failed
    exam to study with before retaking the exam.
  – Make sure to collect all exams and answer keys
    from all students at the end of the
    course/remediation.
Postcourse
Immediately After the Course

At the end of each class:
  Collect and arrange all course paperwork.
  Rearrange the room.
  Clean and store equipment.
  Fill out Training Center course report forms.
  Read and consider comments from course evaluations.
  Send students course completion cards if not already distributed.
  – Reminder: Student course completion cards must be issued to
    students within 20 business days after completing a class. You
    must submit the paperwork to your Training Center after the
    completion of the course for cards to be sent to students within
    this time frame.

Instructor Notes

© 2016 American Heart Association
    Heartsaver First Aid CPR AED
           Blended Lesson Plans

Precourse

Instructor Tips
Prepare for your role as a Heartsaver Instructor well. Review all
course materials and anticipate questions or challenges that may
arise from students during the course. The time you invest in this
part of your preparation is important to the overall success of every
student.
Refer to “Part 2: Teaching the Course” in the Instructor Manual for
further instruction on using Lesson Plans.

30 to 60 Days Before the Course
  Determine course specifics, such as
  – Your class audience, including their professions and how the
    skills taught during this course will translate to their on-the-job
    performance
  – Number of participating students
 – Any special needs or equipment needed for the course
 Reserve all needed equipment to teach the course. Refer to “Part
 1: Preparing for the Course” in the Instructor Manual for a
 complete equipment list.
 Schedule a room that meets the room requirements for the
 Heartsaver course. Refer to “Part 1: Preparing for the Course” in
 the Instructor Manual for detailed requirements.
 Schedule additional instructors, if needed, depending on the size
 of the class.

At Least 3 Weeks Before the Course
 Send participating students precourse letters, student materials,
 and the course agenda.
 Confirm additional scheduled instructors, if needed.
 Research Good Samaritan laws that pertain to your area. This will
 help when answering student questions during the course.

Day Before the Course
 Confirm room reservations and that all required equipment
 needed is available for the course.
 Set up the room and make sure that all technology and
 equipment are working properly. This can also be done the day of
 the course if the room is not accessible the day before.
 Locate the nearest AED in the building and confirm the
 emergency response number.
 Coordinate the roles and responsibilities with additional
 instructors, if needed, to fulfill the course agenda and to ensure
 efficiency and timing of the course, per the course agenda.
 Ensure that all course paperwork is in order.

Day of the Course
Arrive at the course location in plenty of time to complete the
following:
  Make sure all equipment is working and has been cleaned
  according to manufacturer instructions.
  Have the video ready to play before students arrive and make
  sure it is working properly with sound.
  Distribute supplies to the students or set up supplies for students
  to collect when they arrive, with clear instructions on what they
  need.
  Greet students as they arrive to put them at ease, and direct them
  where to go.
  Make sure the course roster is completed by all students as they
  arrive for the course.

Instructor Notes
Lesson 1
Course Introduction                                      5 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Be familiar with the learning objectives and the Heartsaver course
 content. Knowing what you want to communicate, why it’s
 important, and what you want to have happen as a result are
 critical to the success of the course.
 Think about how you want to manage breaks during the course.
 Making yourself available allows you to answer questions people
 might feel too embarrassed to ask in front of everyone. It also
 gives you time to establish rapport and get feedback.
 At the beginning of class, collect each student’s certificate of
 completion for the online portion of the Heartsaver First Aid CPR
 AED course that you are teaching.
 – Students will need to have completed every First Aid CPR AED
    module online that is being practiced and tested on in the
    classroom portion.

          Discussion
             Introduce yourself and additional instructors, if
             present.
             Invite students to introduce themselves.
             – It is important to ask students at the beginning of
                the class to provide information about their
                occupations so you can tailor the class to best fit
                their needs.
             Explain that the course is interactive. Please refer to
             the following points (see detailed information for each
throughout the Instructor Manual) for discussion with
students:
– Your role
– Video-based and instructor-led practice
     Practice while watching
        Refer to “Part 2: Teaching the Course” in the
        Instructor Manual for detailed information
        about practice while watching
– Exam (if required)
– Skills test
Ask that any student who anticipates difficulties with
the skills test due to personal limitations, such as a
medical concern or knee or back problems, speak
with one of the instructors. Refer to “Part 1: Preparing
for the Course” in the Instructor Manual for further
explanation about students with special needs.
Explain the layout of the building, including
bathrooms and emergency exits.
Remind students of where the nearest AED is located
and what their emergency response number is.
Describe the course agenda.
– Inform students of breaks you have scheduled
   during the class.
– Tell the students, “We are scheduled to end at
   _____.”
Remind students what they will practice and be
tested on during the classroom portion. Refer to the
table below.

  Topic             Skills Practice and Testing
Adult CPR    Scene Safety and Assessment
AED          Practice
             Chest Compressions Practice
             Giving Breaths Practice
             Use an AED Practice
             Putting It All Together Practice
             Adult CPR and AED Skills Test
Child CPR    Scene Safety and Assessment
AED          Practice
             Chest Compressions Practice
             Giving Breaths Practice
             Use an AED Practice (not tested)
             Putting It All Together Practice
             Child CPR Skills Test
Infant CPR   Scene Safety and Assessment
             Practice
             Chest Compressions Practice
             Giving Breaths Practice
             Putting It All Together Practice
             Infant CPR Skills Test
             Relief of Choking in a Responsive
             Infant (not tested)
First Aid    Removing Protective Gloves
             (Practice and Test)
             Finding the Problem (Practice and
             Test)
             Using an Epinephrine Pen (Practice
             and Test)
                            Controlling Bleeding and Bandaging
                            (Practice and Test)

              Remind students of the course completion
              requirements:

                   Skills Test              Optional Exam
                  Requirements
             Students must pass the    To pass the optional
             skills test(s).           exam, students must
                                       score at least 84%.

Instructor Notes

         Next

 Life Is Why Activity
 (Optional) or proceed
 to either the Adult CPR
 AED or First Aid
 Blended Lesson Plan,
 depending on the
 course you are
 teaching
Lesson 1A
Life Is Why™ Activity (Optional)                            8 minutes

Instructor Tips
 Before facilitating this lesson, complete the Life Is Why activity in
 the Instructor Manual. Have your “______ Is Why” prepared to
 share with students.
 You can make additional copies for students of the Life Is Why
 activity from the Instructor Manual.

           Play Video
              Play the Life Is Why video.

           Discussion
              To engage the class, after viewing the Life Is Why
              video, take 2 to 3 minutes to share your Why with the
              class, based on your completed Life Is Why activity in
              the Instructor Manual.
              Then, encourage students to participate in the
              following activity:
              – Have students find the “______ Is Why” page in
                their Student Workbook and follow the directions.
                Tell students:
                    Complete this activity by filling in the blank with
                    the word that describes your Why.
                    Tell your family and friends about your “______
                    Is Why,” and ask them to discover their Why.

Instructor Notes
        Next

Adult CPR AED or First
Aid Blended Lesson
Plan, depending on the
course you are
teaching
Lesson 2
Adult CPR AED                                              20 minutes

Part I: Scene Safety and Assessment
Part II: Chest Compressions
Part III: Giving Breaths
Part IV: Use an AED
Part V: Putting It All Together

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Recognize when someone needs CPR
    Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or a mask
    Demonstrate how to use an AED on an adult
    Perform high-quality CPR for an adult

Instructor Tips
  Go to the Skills Practice Menu in the video to access each
  practice-while-watching segment.
  For every practice-while-watching or student practice segment:
  – Observe students and provide positive and corrective feedback
    on their performance.
  – Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all students
    to complete the practice session.
  – If informal remediation is needed for students on the instruction
    of a skill, go to the Lessons Menu in the video and click on the
skill title for instruction.

        Practice While Watching: Scene
        Safety and Assessment
           Students will follow along with the video to complete
           the following actions. These actions can be
           completed in a different order, but this sequence is
           followed during the practice-while-watching segment.
           – Make sure the scene is safe.
           – Tap and shout (check for responsiveness).
           – Shout for help.
           – Phone your local emergency number and get an
             AED.
           – Check for normal breathing.

        Practice While Watching: Chest
        Compressions
           Students will follow along with the video to complete
           the following steps:
           – Position yourself at the ill or injured person’s side.
           – Make sure the person is lying on his back on a
             firm, flat surface.
           – Quickly move clothes out of the way.
           – Put the heel of one hand on the center of the chest
             (over the lower half of the breastbone). Put your
             other hand on top of the first hand.
           – Push straight down at least 5 cm.
           – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
             minute. Count the compressions out loud.
  – Let the chest come back up to its normal position
    after each compression.
  – Try not to interrupt compressions for more than 10
    seconds, even when you give breaths.

Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths
On the Adult CPR and AED Skills Test, you have the
option to test students on giving breaths mouth-to-
mouth or giving breaths with a mask. Have students
practice the giving breaths skill below that they will be
tested on.
Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put one hand on the forehead and the fingers of
     your other hand on the bony part of the chin.
  – Tilt the head back and lift the chin.
  – While holding the airway open, pinch the nose
    closed with your thumb and forefinger.
  – Take a normal breath. Cover the person’s mouth
    with your mouth.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.
        Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
        10 seconds.
Giving Breaths (With a Mask)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put the mask over the person’s mouth and nose.
       If the mask has a pointed end, put the narrow
       end of the mask on the bridge of the nose;
       position the wide end so it covers the mouth.
  – Tilt the head and lift the chin while pressing the
    mask against the person’s face. It is important to
    make an airtight seal between the person’s face
    and the mask while you lift the chin to keep the
    airway open.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.
       Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
       10 seconds.

Students Practice: AED
  Lead students by teaching the following steps on how
  to use an AED. First show the steps while using your
  AED trainer, and then have students practice.
Instructions for Students
  Turn the AED on and follow the prompts.
  – Turn it on by pushing the “on” button or lifting the
     lid.
  – Follow the prompts, which will tell you everything
     you need to do.
  Attach the adult pads.
  – Use the adult pads for anyone 8 years of age and
     older.
  – Peel away the backing from the pads.
  – Following the pictures on the pads, attach them to
    the person’s bare chest.
            Let the AED analyze.
            – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
              touching the person.
            – The AED will analyze the heart rhythm.
            – If a shock is not needed, resume CPR.
            Deliver a shock if needed.
            – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
              touching the person.
            – Push the “shock” button.
            – Immediately resume CPR.

          Students Practice: Putting It All
          Together
            Lead students by teaching the steps of scene safety
            and assessment, adult compressions, giving breaths,
            and using an AED. Refer to each skill in this Lesson
            Plan for detailed steps.
          Allow students enough time for skills practice and
          review of the Adult CPR and AED Skills Test before
          beginning the skills test.

Instructor Notes

        Next

 Adult CPR and AED
Skills Test
Lesson 3
Adult CPR and AED Skills Test                            20 minutes

Instructor Tips
 For skills testing, it is important to be prepared and organized with
 student skills testing checklists. Review these before class, and
 have all materials ready to properly test students on every step.
 During skills testing, be efficient with the use of multiple
 instructors in the room, assigning each a different role, especially
 when there is a high volume of students in the classroom. This
 will ensure effective remediation, a smooth process, and
 efficiency for completing the class on time.
 Make sure students are provided a private setting for skills
 testing.

           Discussion
           Before the Adult CPR and AED Skills Test, read the
           following testing script aloud to the student (may be
           read to all students at once):
           “This test is like a realistic emergency situation: you
           should do whatever you think is necessary to save the
           victim’s life. You will have to determine for yourself what
           you need to do. For example, if you check the response
           on the manikin and there is no response, then you
           should do whatever you would do for a person who is
           not responding. I will read a short scenario to you, but I
           won’t be able to answer any questions. You can treat
           me like another rescuer who has arrived with you and
           tell me to do something to help you. If you make a
           mistake or forget to do something important, you should
           not stop. Just do your best to correct the error. Continue
doing what you would do in an actual emergency until I
tell you to stop. Do you have any questions before we
start?”

Skills Test
  Refer to the “Understanding the Adult CPR and AED
  Skills Testing Checklist” section and the critical skills
  descriptors for specific direction on how to test
  students on adult CPR and AED skills. These are
  found in “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the
  Instructor Manual.
  – Check off each skill as the student demonstrates
     competency per the critical skills descriptors.
  After starting, if the student asks any questions about
  the skills or sequences, you should not give him or
  her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do what you
  think is best right now.” If the student asks questions
  about what to do with the manikin, tell the student,
  “Check the manikin yourself and do what you think is
  needed to save a life.” If the student seems unsure,
  do your best to explain that he or she will be
  assessing the manikin and doing whatever is
  necessary.

Remediation
For students who need remediation, follow these steps
and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
  Determine where the students are having trouble
  during their Adult CPR and AED Skills Test.
  If needed, replay sections of video or practice skills to
  ensure learning.
  Retest skills as necessary.
                Some students may need additional practice or may
                need to repeat the course to demonstrate skills
                competency and to achieve a course completion
                card.

Instructor Notes

If teaching additional topics, skip the course conclusion at this time
and go to the Child CPR AED, Infant CPR, or First Aid Blended
Lesson Plan.

           Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 4
Child CPR AED                                              15 minutes

Part I: Scene Safety and Assessment
Part II: Chest Compressions
Part III: Giving Breaths
Part IV: Use an AED
Part V: Putting It All Together

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Recognize when someone needs CPR
    Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or a mask
    Demonstrate how to use an AED on a child
    Perform high-quality CPR for a child

Instructor Tips
  Using an AED for children is practiced in the classroom portion of
  the blended course, but students will not be tested on using an
  AED on the Child CPR Skills Test.
  Go to the Skills Practice Menu in the video to access each
  practice-while-watching segment.
  For every practice-while-watching or student practice segment:
  – Observe students and provide positive and corrective feedback
    on their performance.
– Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all students
  to complete the practice session.
– If informal remediation is needed for students on the instruction
  of a skill, go to the Lessons Menu in the video and click on the
  skill title for instruction.

         Practice While Watching: Scene
         Safety and Assessment
            Students will follow along with the video to complete
            the following actions. These actions can be
            completed in a different order, but this sequence is
            followed during the practice-while-watching segment.
            – Make sure the scene is safe.
            – Tap and shout (check for responsiveness).
            – Shout for help.
            – Check for breathing.
            – Begin CPR, phone your local emergency number,
              and get an AED.

         Practice While Watching: Chest
         Compressions
            Students will follow along with the video to complete
            the following steps:
            – Position yourself at the victim’s side.
            – Make sure the child is lying on his back on a firm,
               flat surface.
            – Quickly move clothes out of the way.
            – Use either 1 hand or 2 hands to give
              compressions.
        1 hand: Put the heel of one hand on the center
        of the chest (over the lower half of the
        breastbone).
        2 hands: Put the heel of one hand on the
        center of the chest (over the lower half of the
        breastbone). Put your other hand on top of the
        first hand.
  – Push straight down at least one third the depth of
    the chest, or about 5 cm.
  – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
    minute. Count the compressions out loud.
  – Let the chest come back up to its normal position
    after each compression.

Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths
On the Child CPR Skills Test, you have the option to
test students on giving breaths mouth-to-mouth or
giving breaths with a mask. Have students practice the
giving breaths skill below that they will be tested on.
Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put one hand on the forehead and the fingers of
     your other hand on the bony part of the chin.
  – Tilt the head back and lift the chin.
  – While holding the airway open, pinch the nose
    closed with your thumb and forefinger.
  – Take a normal breath. Cover the child’s mouth with
    your mouth.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.
       Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
       10 seconds.
Giving Breaths (With a Mask)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the steps:
  – Put the mask over the child’s mouth and nose.
        If the mask has a pointed end, put the narrow
        end of the mask on the bridge of the nose;
        position the wide end so it covers the mouth.
  – Tilt the head and lift the chin while pressing the
    mask against the child’s face. It is important to
    make an airtight seal between the child’s face and
    the mask while you lift the chin to keep the airway
    open.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.

Students Practice: AED
  Lead students by teaching the following steps on how
  to use an AED. First show the steps while using your
  AED trainer, and then have students practice.
Instructions for Students
  Turn the AED on and follow the prompts.
  – Turn it on by pushing the “on” button or lifting the
    lid.
  – Follow the prompts, which will tell you everything
    you need to do.
 Attach the AED pads.
 – Use the child pads if the child is an infant to 8
    years old. If child pads are not available, use adult
    pads.
 – Use adult pads if the child is older than 8 years.
 – Peel away the backing from the pads.
 – Following the pictures on the pads, attach them to
   the child’s bare chest. Make sure the pads do not
   touch each other.
       On a small chest, if this causes the pads to
       overlap, consider placing one pad on the chest
       and one pad on the back.
 Let the AED analyze.
 – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
   touching the child.
 – The AED will analyze the heart rhythm.
 – If a shock is not needed, resume CPR.
 Deliver a shock if needed.
 – Loudly state “clear” and make sure that no one is
   touching the child.
 – Push the “shock” button.
 – Immediately resume CPR.

Students Practice: Putting It All
Together
 Lead students by teaching the steps of scene safety
 and assessment, child compressions, giving breaths,
 and using an AED. Refer to each skill in this Lesson
 Plan for detailed steps.
           Allow students enough time for skills practice and
           review of the Child CPR Skills Test before beginning the
           skills test.

Instructor Notes

         Next
 Child CPR Skills Test
Lesson 5
Child CPR Skills Test                                    12 minutes

Instructor Tips
 For skills testing, it is important to be prepared and organized with
 student skills testing checklists. Review these before class, and
 have all materials ready to properly test students on every step.
 During skills testing, be efficient with the use of multiple
 instructors in the room, assigning each a different role, especially
 when there is a high volume of students in the classroom. This
 will ensure effective remediation, a smooth process, and
 efficiency for completing the class on time.
 Make sure students are provided a private setting for skills
 testing.

           Discussion
           Before the Child CPR Skills Test, read the following
           testing script aloud to the student (may be read to all
           students at once):
           “This test is like a realistic emergency situation: you
           should do whatever you think is necessary to save the
           victim’s life. You will have to determine for yourself what
           you need to do. For example, if you check the response
           on the manikin and there is no response, then you
           should do whatever you would do for a person who is
           not responding. I will read a short scenario to you, but I
           won’t be able to answer any questions. You can treat
           me like another rescuer who has arrived with you and
           tell me to do something to help you. If you make a
           mistake or forget to do something important, you should
           not stop. Just do your best to correct the error. Continue
doing what you would do in an actual emergency until I
tell you to stop. Do you have any questions before we
start?”

Skills Test
  Refer to the “Understanding the Child CPR Skills
  Testing Checklist” section and the critical skills
  descriptors for specific direction on how to test
  students on child CPR skills. These are found in “Part
  4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
  – Check off each skill as the student demonstrates
     competency per the critical skills descriptors.
  After starting, if the student asks any questions about
  the skills or sequences, you should not give him or
  her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do what you
  think is best right now.” If the student asks questions
  about what to do with the manikin, tell the student,
  “Check the manikin yourself and do what you think is
  needed to save a life.” If the student seems unsure,
  do your best to explain that he or she will be
  assessing the manikin and doing whatever is
  necessary.

Remediation
For students who need remediation, follow these steps
and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
  Determine where the students are having trouble
  during their Child CPR Skills Test.
  If needed, replay sections of video or practice skills to
  ensure learning.
  Retest skills as necessary.
                Some students may need additional practice or may
                need to repeat the course to demonstrate skills
                competency and to achieve a course completion
                card.

Instructor Notes

If teaching additional topics, skip the course conclusion at this time
and go to the Infant CPR or First Aid Blended Lesson Plan.

           Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 6
Infant CPR                                                 15 minutes

Part I: Scene Safety and Assessment
Part II: Chest Compressions
Part III: Giving Breaths
Part IV: Putting It All Together

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
    Recognize when someone needs CPR
    Give effective breaths by using mouth-to-mouth or a mask
    Perform high-quality CPR for an infant

Instructor Tips
  Go to the Skills Practice Menu in the video to access each
  practice-while-watching segment.
  For every practice-while-watching or student practice segment:
  – Observe students and provide positive and corrective feedback
    on their performance.
  – Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all students
    to complete the practice session.
  – If informal remediation is needed for students on the instruction
    of a skill, go to the Lessons Menu in the video and click on the
    skill title for instruction.
Practice While Watching: Scene
Safety and Assessment
 Students will follow along with the video to complete
 the following actions. These actions can be
 completed in a different order, but this sequence is
 followed during the practice-while-watching segment.
 – Make sure the scene is safe.
 – Tap and shout (check for responsiveness).
 – Shout for help.
 – Check for breathing.
 – Begin CPR, phone your local emergency number,
   and get an AED.

Practice While Watching: Chest
Compressions
 Students will follow along with the video to complete
 the following steps:
 – Position yourself at the victim’s side.
 – Make sure the infant is lying on his back on a firm,
   flat surface.
 – Quickly move clothes out of the way.
 – Use 2 fingers of one hand to give chest
   compressions. Place them on the breastbone, just
   below the nipple line.
 – Push straight down at least one third the depth of
   the chest, or about 4 cm.
 – Push at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
   minute. Count the compressions out loud.
 – Let the chest come back up to its normal position
   after each compression.
Practice While Watching: Giving
Breaths
On the Infant CPR Skills Test, you have the option to
test students on giving breaths mouth-to-mouth or
giving breaths with a mask. Have students practice the
giving breaths skill below that they will be tested on.
Giving Breaths (Mouth-to-Mouth)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
  – Put one hand on the forehead and the fingers of
     your other hand on the bony part of the chin.
  – Tilt the head back and lift the chin.
  – While holding the airway open, take a normal
     breath. Cover the infant’s mouth and nose with
     your mouth. If you have difficulty making an
     effective seal, try either a mouth-to-mouth or a
     mouth-to-nose breath.
        If you use the mouth-to-mouth technique, pinch
        the nose closed.
       If you use the mouth-to-nose technique, close
       the mouth.
  – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
    for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
    breath.
        Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
        10 seconds.
Giving Breaths (With a Mask)
  Students will follow along with the video to complete
  the following steps:
          – Put the mask over the infant’s mouth and nose.
          – If the mask has a pointed end, put the narrow end
            of the mask on the bridge of the nose; position the
            wide end so it covers the mouth.
          – Tilt the head and lift the chin while pressing the
            mask against the infant’s face. It is important to
            make an airtight seal between the infant’s face and
            the mask while you lift the chin to keep the airway
            open.
          – Give 2 breaths (blow for 1 second for each). Watch
            for the chest to begin to rise as you give each
            breath.
                Try not to interrupt compressions for more than
                10 seconds.

        Students Practice: Putting It All
        Together
          Lead students by teaching the steps of scene safety
          and assessment, infant compressions, and giving
          breaths. Refer to each skill in this Lesson Plan for
          detailed steps.
        Allow students enough time for skills practice and
        review of the Infant CPR Skills Test before beginning
        the skills test.

Instructor Notes
        Next

Infant CPR Skills Test
Lesson 7
Infant CPR Skills Test                                   12 minutes

Instructor Tips
 For skills testing, it is important to be prepared and organized with
 student skills testing checklists. Review these before class, and
 have all materials ready to properly test students on every step.
 During skills testing, be efficient with the use of multiple
 instructors in the room, assigning each a different role, especially
 when there is a high volume of students in the classroom. This
 will ensure effective remediation, a smooth process, and
 efficiency for completing the class on time.
 Make sure students are provided a private setting for skills
 testing.

           Discussion
           Before the Infant CPR Skills Test, read the following
           testing script aloud to the student (may be read to all
           students at once):
           “This test is like a realistic emergency situation: you
           should do whatever you think is necessary to save the
           victim’s life. You will have to determine for yourself what
           you need to do. For example, if you check the response
           on the manikin and there is no response, then you
           should do whatever you would do for a person who is
           not responding. I will read a short scenario to you, but I
           won’t be able to answer any questions. You can treat
           me like another rescuer who has arrived with you and
           tell me to do something to help you. If you make a
           mistake or forget to do something important, you should
           not stop. Just do your best to correct the error. Continue
doing what you would do in an actual emergency until I
tell you to stop. Do you have any questions before we
start?”

Skills Test
  Refer to the “Understanding the Infant CPR Skills
  Testing Checklist” section and the critical skills
  descriptors for specific direction on how to test
  students on infant CPR skills. These are found in
  “Part 4: Additional Resources” in the Instructor
  Manual.
  – Check off each skill as the student demonstrates
     competency per the critical skills descriptors.
  After starting, if the student asks any questions about
  the skills or sequences, you should not give him or
  her the answer. Rather, tell the student, “Do what you
  think is best right now.” If the student asks questions
  about what to do with the manikin, tell the student,
  “Check the manikin yourself and do what you think is
  needed to save a life.” If the student seems unsure,
  do your best to explain that he or she will be
  assessing the manikin and doing whatever is
  necessary.

Remediation
For students who need remediation, follow these steps
and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
  Determine where the students are having trouble
  during their Infant CPR Skills Test.
  If needed, replay sections of video or practice skills to
  ensure learning.
  Retest skills as necessary.
              Some students may need additional practice or may
              need to repeat the course to demonstrate skills
              competency and to achieve a course completion
              card.

Instructor Notes

         Next
 Relief of Choking in a
 Responsive Infant
Lesson 8
Relief of Choking in a
Responsive Infant                                            2 minutes

 Learning Objective
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Demonstrate how to help a choking infant

Instructor Tips
  Go to the Skills Practice Menu in the video to access each
  practice-while-watching segment.
  For every practice-while-watching or student practice segment:
  – Observe students and provide positive and corrective feedback
    on their performance.
  – Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all students
    to complete the practice session.
  – If informal remediation is needed for students on the instruction
    of a skill, go to the Lessons Menu in the video and click on the
    skill title for instruction.

            Practice While Watching: Relief of
            Choking in a Responsive Infant
               Students will follow along with the video to complete
               the following steps:
               – Kneel or sit with the infant in your lap.
               – If it is easy to do, remove clothing from the infant’s
                  chest.
                – Hold the infant facedown on your forearm. Support
                  the infant’s head and jaw with your hand.
                – Give up to 5 back slaps with the heel of your other
                  hand between the infant’s shoulder blades.
                – If the object does not come out after 5 back slaps,
                  turn the infant onto his back, supporting the head.
                – Give up to 5 chest thrusts by using 2 fingers of
                  your other hand to push on the chest in the same
                  place you push during CPR.
                – Repeat giving 5 back slaps and 5 chest thrusts
                  until the infant can breathe, cough, or cry or until
                  he becomes unresponsive.

Instructor Notes

If teaching additional topics, skip the course conclusion at this time
and go to the First Aid Blended Lesson Plan.

           Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 9
First Aid                                                  30 minutes

Part I: Removing Protective Gloves
Part II: Finding the Problem
Part III: Using an Epinephrine Pen
Part IV: Controlling Bleeding and Bandaging

 Learning Objectives
 Tell students that at the end of this lesson, they will be able to
   Remove protective gloves (skill student will demonstrate)
   Find the problem (skill student will demonstrate)
   Use an epinephrine pen (skill student will demonstrate)
   Control bleeding and bandaging (skills student will
   demonstrate)

Instructor Tips
  For every student practice segment:
  – Observe students and provide positive and corrective feedback
    on their performance.
  – Repeat the practice as many times as needed for all students
    to complete the practice session.
  – If informal remediation is needed for students on the instruction
    of a skill, go to the Skills Review menu in the video and click on
    the skill title for instruction.
  For every first aid skills test:
– The First Aid Skills Testing Checklist is found in “Part 4:
  Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
– Do not demonstrate skills or coach during the skills test. After
  starting, if the student asks any questions about the skills or
  sequences, you should not give him or her the answer. Rather,
  tell the student, “Do what you think is best right now.”
– Determine where the student is having trouble during the skills
  test.
– For students who need remediation, follow the steps on the
  remediation Lesson Plan.

         Students Practice: Removing
         Protective Gloves
            Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
            complete the following steps:
            – Grips one glove on the outside, near the cuff, to
              peel it off
            – Cups the inside-out glove with the gloved hand
            – Places 2 fingers of the bare hand inside the cuff to
              peel the second glove off, with the first glove
              inside it
            – Verbalizes the need to dispose of gloves properly

         Test: Removing Protective Gloves
         Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
         direction on how to test students on first aid skills.
            For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
            the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
            Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.
Students Practice: Finding the
Problem
  Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
  complete the following steps:
  – Verbalizes that the scene is safe
  – Taps and shouts
  – Shouts for help/Phones your local emergency
    number/Gets first aid kit and AED
  – Checks for breathing
  – Looks for injury and medical information jewelry
  – Verbalizes that he or she will stay with the person
    until EMS arrives

Test: Finding the Problem
Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
direction on how to test students on first aid skills.
  For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
  the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
  Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.

Students Practice: Using an
Epinephrine Pen
  Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
  complete the following steps:
  – Holds epinephrine pen in fist
  – Takes off safety cap
  – Presses epinephrine pen firmly against outer side
    of thigh for 10 seconds
  – Removes epinephrine pen
          – Rubs injection site for 10 seconds

        Test: Using an Epinephrine Pen
        Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
        direction on how to test students on first aid skills.
          For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
          the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
          Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.

        Students Practice: Controlling
        Bleeding and Bandaging
          Per the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist, students will
          complete the following steps:
          – Tells person to place pressure over cut with clean
            dressing
          – Verbalizes putting on gloves
          – Applies pressure to bleeding area
          – Adds more dressings and presses harder
          – Applies more bandages over the dressing

        Test: Controlling Bleeding and
        Bandaging
        Refer to the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist for specific
        direction on how to test students on first aid skills.
          For further detail on each step, see “Understanding
          the First Aid Skills Testing Checklist” in “Part 4:
          Additional Resources” in the Instructor Manual.

Instructor Notes
If teaching additional topics, skip the course conclusion at this time
and go to the Adult CPR AED, Child CPR AED, or Infant CPR
Blended Lesson Plan.

           Next
 Course Conclusion
Lesson 10
Course Conclusion                                     2 minutes

Instructor Tips
 The Course Conclusion video can be found in the main menu of
 the Heartsaver CPR AED video.
 When summarizing what the course has covered, allow students
 to lead this discussion at times by asking 1 or 2 students
 (maximum, for class time efficiency) what they observed/learned
 during the course.
 During the conclusion, be sure to provide students with clear
 direction on how they can further study and seek out additional
 resources provided by the AHA to help with postclassroom
 training.

          Play Video
          The video will show and discuss
             Course Conclusion

          Discussion
          To conclude the course:
             Thank students for their participation.
             Summarize what students learned during the course.
             Make sure that students complete the evaluation
             form.

Instructor Notes
Exam (Optional)                                        Time varies

Instructor Tips
 The Heartsaver exam is not required for all students—only those
 who request to take the exam for workplace requirements. Make
 sure you are aware of which students need to take the Heartsaver
 exam before class. The exam will need to cover all sections
 taught during the course.
 During testing and remediation, be efficient with the use of
 multiple instructors in the room, assigning each a different role,
 especially when there is a high volume of students in the
 classroom. This will ensure effective remediation, a smooth
 process, and efficiency for completing the class on time.
 For the exam, make sure that students are provided an
 environment conducive to testing: quiet with minimal distractions
 and plenty of time to complete the exam.

          Discussion
          Give students the following instructions for the exam:
             Tell students not to write on the exam.
             Students may not cooperate or talk to each other
             during the exam.
             Exams are open resource, and students are allowed
             to use the Student Workbook and any other
             accessible resources while taking the exam. Refer to
             “Part 3: Testing and Remediation” in the Instructor
             Manual for details about open-resource exams.

          Exam
             Distribute answer sheets and exams.
          As students complete the exam, collect their exams
          and begin to grade them.
          Regardless of their score, all students should be
          given their exam results and be allowed the
          opportunity to review and ask questions.

        Remediation
        For students who need remediation, follow these steps
        and refer to the remediation Lesson Plan.
          Students who scored less than 84% need immediate
          remediation.
          Provide remediation by giving a second exam or by
          having students verbally answer each item they got
          incorrect, showing understanding of incorrect items.
          Upon successful remediation, students should show
          an improvement in being able to provide correct
          responses and an understanding of the correct
          response.

Instructor Notes
Remediation                                              Time varies

Part I: Skills Testing Remediation
Part II: Exam Remediation

Instructor Tips
  The formal remediation lesson is facilitated if a student did not
  successfully pass the exam or skills testing during the course.
  For further detail on remediation and retesting students, refer to
  “Part 3: Testing and Remediation” in the Instructor Manual.
  As an instructor, you will need to determine which section of the
  course the student is having trouble with.

            Play Video: Skills Testing
            Remediation
               Replay scenarios, instruction, and/or practice-while-
               watching segments of the video as needed to ensure
               learning and for the student to have additional
               practice.
               Repeat practice until the student feels comfortable
               and is ready to move forward with the exam or skills
               test.
               – Some students may need additional practice or
                  may need to repeat the course to demonstrate
                  skills competency and to achieve a course
                  completion card.
               Formal remediation should occur if all boxes on the
               skills testing checklist are not checked as complete.
Skills Test
 Retest Heartsaver skills as necessary by using the
 skills testing checklists. Refer to the skills testing
 Lesson Plans for additional instructions on
 administering the skills tests.

Exam
 Students who scored less than 84% need immediate
 remediation and will need to retake the exam. Refer
 to the exam Lesson Plan for additional instructions on
 how to administer the exam.
 – Provide remediation by giving a second exam or
    by having students verbally answer each item they
    got incorrect, showing understanding of incorrect
    items.
 – Upon successful remediation, students should
   show an improvement in being able to provide
   correct responses and an understanding of the
   correct response.
 – Make sure that students are given their failed
   exam to study with before retaking the exam.
 – Make sure to collect all exams and answer keys
   from all students at the end of the
   course/remediation.
Postcourse
Immediately After the Course

At the end of each class:
  Collect and arrange all course paperwork.
  Rearrange the room.
  Clean and store equipment.
  Fill out Training Center course report forms.
  Read and consider comments from course evaluations.
  Send students course completion cards if not already distributed.
  – Reminder: Student course completion cards must be issued to
    students within 20 business days after completing a class. You
    must submit the paperwork to your Training Center after the
    completion of the course for cards to be sent to students within
    this time frame.

Instructor Notes

© 2016 American Heart Association



################################################################################
# SECTION 3: DERMATOLOGY & SKIN CONDITIONS
# Source: Dermatology Handbook for medical students 2nd Edition 2014 Final2(2).pdf
################################################################################

 Dermatology
A handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                 British Association of Dermatologists
                                    Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

     This publication is supported by the British Association of Dermatologists.

                                 First edition 2009
                             Revised first edition 2009
                                Second edition 2014

For comments and feedback, please contact the author at chiangyizhen@gmail.com.

                                         1                   British Association of Dermatologists
                              Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

 Dermatology
A handbook for medical students & junior doctors

           Dr Nicole Yi Zhen Chiang MBChB (Hons), MRCP (UK)
                   Specialty Registrar in Dermatology
                  Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust
                          Manchester M6 8HD

          Professor Julian Verbov MD FRCP FRCPCH CBiol FSB FLS
                        Professor of Dermatology
                  Consultant Paediatric Dermatologist
                      Alder Hey Children’s Hospital
                            Liverpool L12 2AP

                                   2                   British Association of Dermatologists
                                       Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Contents

 Preface                                                                                  5

 Foreword                                                                                 6

 What is dermatology?                                                                     7

 Essential Clinical Skills                                                                8
  Taking a dermatological history                                                         8
  Examining the skin                                                                      9
  Communicating examination findings                                                      10

 Background Knowledge                                                                     23
  Functions of normal skin                                                                23
  Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages                                        23
  Principles of wound healing                                                             27

 Emergency Dermatology                                                                    28
  Urticaria, Angioedema and Anaphylaxis                                                   29
  Erythema nodosum                                                                        30
  Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, Toxic epidermal necrolysis               31
  Acute meningococcaemia                                                                  32
  Erythroderma                                                                            33
  Eczema herpeticum                                                                       34
  Necrotizing fasciitis                                                                   35

 Skin Infections / Infestations                                                           36
  Erysipelas and cellulitis                                                               37
  Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome                                                    38
  Superficial fungal skin infections                                                      39

 Skin Cancer                                                                              41
  Basal cell carcinoma                                                                    42
  Squamous cell carcinoma                                                                 43
  Malignant melanoma                                                                      44

 Inflammatory Skin Conditions                                                             46
  Atopic eczema                                                                           47
  Acne vulgaris                                                                           49
  Psoriasis                                                                               50

 Blistering Disorders                                                                     52
  Bullous pemphigoid                                                                      53
  Pemphigus vulgaris                                                                      54

                                            3                   British Association of Dermatologists
                                      Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Common Important Problems                                                                55
 Chronic leg ulcers                                                                      56
 Itchy eruption                                                                          58
 A changing pigmented lesion                                                             60
 Purpuric eruption                                                                       62
 A red swollen leg                                                                       64

Management                                                                               65
 Emollients                                                                              66
 Topical/Oral steroids                                                                   66
 Oral aciclovir                                                                          66
 Oral antihistamines                                                                     66
 Topical/Oral antibiotics                                                                67
 Topical antiseptics                                                                     67
 Oral retinoids                                                                          67

Practical Skills                                                                         68
 Patient education                                                                       69
 Written communication                                                                   70
 Prescribing skills                                                                      70
 Clinical examination and investigations                                                 71
        71
Acknowledgements                                                                         72

                                           4                   British Association of Dermatologists
                                          Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

 Preface

This Handbook of Dermatology is intended for senior medical students and newly qualified
doctors.

For many reasons, including modern medical curriculum structure and a lack of suitable
patients to provide adequate clinical material, most UK medical schools provide inadequate
exposure to the specialty for the undergraduate. A basic readable and understandable text
with illustrations has become a necessity.

This text is available online and in print and should become essential reading. Dr Chiang is to
be congratulated for her exceptional industry and enthusiasm in converting an idea into a
reality.

Julian Verbov
Professor of Dermatology                                                      Liverpool 2009

 Preface to the 2nd edition

Nicole and I are gratifed by the response to this Handbook which clearly fulfils its purpose.
The positive feedback we have received has encouraged us to slightly expand the text and
allowed us to update where necessary. I should like to thank the BAD for its continued
support.

Julian Verbov
Professor of Dermatology                                                      Liverpool 2014

                                               5                   British Association of Dermatologists
                                          Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

 Foreword to First edition

There is a real need for appropriate information to meet the educational needs of doctors at
all levels. The hard work of those who produce the curricula on which teaching is based can
be undermined if the available teaching and learning materials are not of a standard that
matches the developed content. I am delighted to associate the BAD with this excellent
handbook, designed and developed by the very people at whom it is aimed, and matching
the medical student and junior doctor curriculum directly. Any handbook must meet the
challenges of being comprehensive, but brief, well illustrated, and focused to clinical
presentations as well as disease groups. This book does just that, and is accessible and easily
used. It may be read straight through, or dipped into for specific clinical problems. It has
valuable sections on clinical method, and useful tips on practical procedures. It should find a
home in the pocket of students and doctors in training, and will be rapidly worn out. I wish it
had been available when I was in need, I am sure that you will all use it well in the pursuit of
excellent clinical dermatology!

Dr Mark Goodfield
President of the British Association of Dermatologists

                                                6                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                      Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

What is dermatology?

 •   Dermatology is the study of both normal and abnormal skin and associated
     structures such as hair, nails, and oral and genital mucous membranes.

Why is dermatology important?

 •   Skin diseases are very common, affecting up to a third of the population at any one
     time.

 •   Skin diseases have serious impacts on life. They can cause physical damage,
     embarrassment, and social and occupational restrictions. Chronic skin diseases may
     cause financial constraints with repeated sick leave. Some skin conditions can be
     life-threatening.

 •   In 2006-07, the total NHS health expenditure for skin diseases was estimated to be
     around ₤97 million (approximately 2% of the total NHS health expenditure).

What is this handbook about?

 •   The British Association of Dermatologists outlined the essential and important
     learning outcomes that should be achieved by all medical undergraduates for the
     competent assessment of patients presenting with skin disorders (available on:
     http://www.bad.org.uk/Portals/_Bad/Education/Undergraduate%20Edu
     cation/(Link2)%20Core%20curriculum.pdf).

 •   This handbook addresses these learning outcomes and aims to equip you with the
     knowledge and skills to practise competently and safely as a junior doctor.

                                           7                   British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                            Essential Clinical Skills – Taking a dermatological history
                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

 Essential Clinical Skills

    •     Detailed history taking and examination provide important diagnostic clues in the
          assessment of skin problems.

 Learning outcomes:
        1. Ability to take a dermatological history
        2. Ability to explore a patient’s concerns and expectations
        3. Ability to interact sensitively with people with skin disease
        4. Ability to examine skin, hair, nails and mucous membranes systematically
            showing respect for the patient
        5. Ability to describe physical signs in skin, hair, nails and mucosa
        6. Ability to record findings accurately in patient’s records

Taking a dermatological history
    •     Using the standard structure of history taking, below are the important points to
          consider when taking a history from a patient with a skin problem (Table 1).
    •     For dark lesions or moles, pay attention to questions marked with an asterisk (*).
Table 1. Taking a dermatological history
Main headings                              Key questions
Presenting complaint                       Nature, site and duration of problem
History of presenting complaint            Initial appearance and evolution of lesion*
                                           Symptoms (particularly itch and pain)*
                                           Aggravating and relieving factors
                                           Previous and current treatments (effective or not)
                                           Recent contact, stressful events, illness and travel
                                           History of sunburn and use of tanning machines*
                                           Skin type (see page 70)*
Past medical history                       History of atopy i.e. asthma, allergic rhinitis, eczema
                                           History of skin cancer and suspicious skin lesions
Family history                             Family history of skin disease*
Social history                             Occupation (including skin contacts at work)
                                           Improvement of lesions when away from work
Medication and allergies                   Regular, recent and over-the-counter medications
Impact on quality of life                  Impact of skin condition and concerns

                                                8                   British Association of Dermatologists
Essential Clinical Skills – Examining the skin
                                                                                         Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                 Examining the skin

                                                     •   There are four important principles in performing a good examination of the skin:
                                                         INSPECT, DESCRIBE, PALPATE and SYSTEMATIC CHECK (Table 2).

                                                 Table 2. Examining the skin
                                                 Main principles                         Key features
                                                 INSPECT in general                      General observation
                                                                                         Site and number of lesion(s)
                                                                                         If multiple, pattern of distribution and configuration

                                                 DESCRIBE the individual lesion          SCAM
                                                                                         Size (the widest diameter), Shape
                                                                                         Colour
                                                                                         Associated secondary change
                                                                                         Morphology, Margin (border)

                                                 *If the lesion is pigmented, remember ABCD
                                                 (the presence of any of these features increase the likelihood of melanoma):
                                                                                         Asymmetry (lack of mirror image in any of the
                                                                                         four quadrants)
                                                                                         Irregular Border
                                                                                         Two or more Colours within the lesion
                                                                                         Diameter > 6mm

                                                 PALPATE the individual lesion           Surface
                                                                                         Consistency
                                                                                         Mobility
                                                                                         Tenderness
                                                                                         Temperature

                                                 SYSTEMATIC CHECK                        Examine the nails, scalp, hair & mucous membranes
                                                                                         General examination of all systems

                                                                                              9                   British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                              Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                             Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Communicating examination findings

   •     In order to describe, record and communicate examination findings accurately, it is
         important to learn the appropriate terminology (Tables 3-10).

Table 3. General terms
Terms            Meaning
Pruritus         Itching
Lesion           An area of altered skin
Rash             An eruption
Naevus           A localised malformation of tissue structures
                 Example: (Picture Source: D@nderm)

                                                         Pigmented melanocytic naevus (mole)

Comedone         A plug in a sebaceous follicle containing altered sebum, bacteria and
                 cellular debris; can present as either open (blackheads) or closed
                 (whiteheads)
                 Example:

                           Open comedones (left) and closed comedones (right) in acne

                                                  10                  British Association of Dermatologists
Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                                                                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                 Table 4. Distribution (the pattern of spread of lesions)
                                                                 Terms           Meaning
                                                                 Generalised     All over the body
                                                                 Widespread      Extensive
                                                                 Localised       Restricted to one area of skin only
                                                                 Flexural        Body folds i.e. groin, neck, behind ears, popliteal and antecubital fossa
                                                                 Extensor        Knees, elbows, shins
                                                                 Pressure areas Sacrum, buttocks, ankles, heels
                                                                 Dermatome       An area of skin supplied by a single spinal nerve
                                                                 Photosensitive Affects sun-exposed areas such as face, neck and back of hands
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                                            Sunburn

                                                                 Köebner         A linear eruption arising at site of trauma
                                                                 phenomenon Example:

                                                                                                                            Psoriasis

                                                                                                                11                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                          Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                         Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Table 5. Configuration (the pattern or shape of grouped lesions)
Terms           Meaning
Discrete        Individual lesions separated from each other
Confluent       Lesions merging together
Linear          In a line
Target          Concentric rings (like a dartboard)
                Example:

                                                       Erythema multiforme

Annular         Like a circle or ring
                Example:

                                              Tinea corporis
                                              (‘ringworm’)

Discoid /       A coin-shaped/round lesion
Nummular        Example:

                                              Discoid eczema

                                              12                  British Association of Dermatologists
Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                                                                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                 Table 6. Colour
                                                                 Terms             Meaning
                                                                 Erythema          Redness (due to inflammation and vasodilatation) which blanches on
                                                                                   pressure
                                                                                   Example:

                                                                                                                Palmar erythema

                                                                 Purpura           Red or purple colour (due to bleeding into the skin or mucous membrane)
                                                                                   which does not blanch on pressure – petechiae (small pinpoint macules) and
                                                                                   ecchymoses (larger bruise-like patches)
                                                                                   Example:

                                                                                                                Henoch-Schönlein purpura
                                                                                                                (palpable small vessel vasculitis)

                                                                                                                13                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                       Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                     Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Hypo-        Area(s) of paler skin
pigmentation Example:

                                          Pityriasis versicolor
                                          (a superficial fungus infection)

De-          White skin due to absence of melanin
pigmentation Example:

                                                    Vitiligo
                                                    (loss of skin melanocytes)

Hyper-       Darker skin which may be due to various causes (e.g. post-inflammatory)
pigmentation Example:

                                          Melasma
                                          (increased melanin pigmentation)

                                          14                   British Association of Dermatologists
Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                                                                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                 Table 7. Morphology (the structure of a lesion) – Primary lesions
                                                                 Terms           Meaning
                                                                 Macule          A flat area of altered colour
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                                      Freckles

                                                                 Patch           Larger flat area of altered colour or texture
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                                            Vascular malformation
                                                                                                                            (naevus flammeus / ‘port wine stain’)

                                                                 Papule          Solid raised lesion < 0.5cm in diameter
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                                 Xanthomata

                                                                                                                 15                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                              Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Nodule         Solid raised lesion >0.5cm in diameter with a deeper component
               Example: (Picture source: D@nderm)

                                                          Pyogenic granuloma
                                                          (granuloma telangiectaticum)

Plaque         Palpable scaling raised lesion >0.5cm in diameter
               Example:

                                                          Psoriasis

Vesicle        Raised, clear fluid-filled lesion <0.5cm in diameter
(small blister) Example:

                                                          Acute hand eczema
                                                          (pompholyx)

Bulla          Raised, clear fluid-filled lesion >0.5cm in diameter
(large blister) Example:

                                       Reaction to insect bites

                                                16                    British Association of Dermatologists
Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                                                                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                 Pustule         Pus-containing lesion <0.5cm in diameter
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                                          Acne

                                                                 Abscess         Localised accumulation of pus in the dermis or subcutaneous tissues
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                                          Periungual abscess
                                                                                                                          (acute paronychia)

                                                                 W(h)eal         Transient raised lesion due to dermal oedema
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                                          Urticaria

                                                                 Boil/Furuncle Staphylococcal infection around or within a hair follicle

                                                                 Carbuncle       Staphylococcal infection of adjacent hair follicles (multiple boils/furuncles)

                                                                                                                17                    British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                            Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                        Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Table 8. Morphology - Secondary lesions (lesions that evolve from primary lesions)
Terms          Meaning
Excoriation    Loss of epidermis following trauma
               Example:

                                                         Excoriations in eczema

Lichenification Well-defined roughening of skin with accentuation of skin markings
               Example:

                                                         Lichenification due to chronic rubbing in eczema

Scales         Flakes of stratum corneum
               Example:

                                                         Psoriasis (showing silvery scales)

                                             18                  British Association of Dermatologists
Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                                                                                  Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                 Crust   Rough surface consisting of dried serum, blood, bacteria and cellular debris
                                                                         that has exuded through an eroded epidermis (e.g. from a burst blister)
                                                                         Example:

                                                                                                       Impetigo

                                                                 Scar    New fibrous tissue which occurs post-wound healing, and may be atrophic
                                                                         (thinning), hypertrophic (hyperproliferation within wound boundary), or
                                                                         keloidal (hyperproliferation beyond wound boundary)
                                                                         Example:

                                                                                                                 Keloid scars

                                                                 Ulcer   Loss of epidermis and dermis (heals with scarring)
                                                                         Example:

                                                                                                       Leg ulcers

                                                                                                       19                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                   Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                  Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Fissure   An epidermal crack often due to excess dryness
          Example:

                                       Eczema

Striae    Linear areas which progress from purple to pink to white, with the
          histopathological appearance of a scar (associated with excessive steroid
          usage and glucocorticoid production, growth spurts and pregnancy)
          Example:

                                       Striae

                                       20                  British Association of Dermatologists
Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                                                                                         Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                 Table 9. Hair
                                                                 Terms           Meaning
                                                                 Alopecia        Loss of hair
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                             Alopecia areata
                                                                                                             (well-defined patch of complete hair loss)

                                                                 Hirsutism       Androgen-dependent hair growth in a female
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                             Hirsutism

                                                                 Hypertrichosis Non-androgen dependent pattern of excessive hair growth
                                                                                 (e.g. in pigmented naevi)
                                                                                 Example:

                                                                                                             Hypertrichosis

                                                                                                              21                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                 Essential Clinical Skills – Communicating examination findings
                                                Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Table 10. Nails
Terms             Meaning
Clubbing          Loss of angle between the posterior nail fold and nail plate
                  (associations include suppurative lung disease, cyanotic heart disease,
                  inflammatory bowel disease and idiopathic)
                  Example: (Picture source: D@nderm)

                                      Clubbing

Koilonychia       Spoon-shaped depression of the nail plate
                  (associations include iron-deficiency anaemia, congenital and idiopathic)
                  Example: (Picture source: D@nderm)

                                      Koilonychia

Onycholysis       Separation of the distal end of the nail plate from nail bed
                  (associations include trauma, psoriasis, fungal nail infection and
                  hyperthyroidism)
                  Example: (Picture source: D@nderm)

                                      Onycholysis

Pitting           Punctate depressions of the nail plate
                  (associations include psoriasis, eczema and alopecia areata)
                  Example: (Picture source: D@nderm)

                                      Pitting

                                                     22                  British Association of Dermatologists
Background Knowledge – Functions of normal skin
                                                                                            Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                   Background Knowledge

                                                     • This section covers the basic knowledge of normal skin structure and function
                                                           required to help understand how skin diseases occur.

                                                   Learning outcomes:
                                                         1. Ability to describe the functions of normal skin
                                                         2. Ability to describe the structure of normal skin
                                                         3. Ability to describe the principles of wound healing
                                                         4. Ability to describe the difficulties, physical and psychological, that may be
                                                             experienced by people with chronic skin disease

                                                  Functions of normal skin

                                                     •     These include:
                                                                       i)      Protective barrier against environmental insults
                                                                       ii)     Temperature regulation
                                                                       iii)    Sensation
                                                                       iv)     Vitamin D synthesis
                                                                       v)      Immunosurveillance
                                                                       vi)     Appearance/cosmesis

                                                  Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages

                                                     •     The skin is the largest organ in the human body. It is composed of the epidermis and
                                                           dermis overlying subcutaneous tissue. The skin appendages (structures formed by
                                                           skin-derived cells) are hair, nails, sebaceous glands and sweat glands.

                                                  Epidermis
                                                     •     The epidermis is composed of 4 major cell types, each with specific functions (Table
                                                           11).

                                                                                                 23                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                               Background Knowledge – Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages
                                              Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Table 11. Main functions of each cell type in the epidermis
Cell types                  Main functions
Keratinocytes               Produce keratin as a protective barrier
Langerhans’ cells           Present antigens and activate T-lymphocytes for immune protection
Melanocytes                 Produce melanin, which gives pigment to the skin and protects the
                            cell nuclei from ultraviolet (UV) radiation-induced DNA damage
Merkel cells                Contain specialised nerve endings for sensation

    •    There are 4 layers in the epidermis (Table 12), each representing a different stage of
         maturation of the keratinocytes. The average epidermal turnover time (migration of
         cells from the basal cell layer to the horny layer) is about 30 days.

Table 12. Composition of each epidermal layer
Epidermal layers                     Composition
Stratum basale                       Actively dividing cells, deepest layer
(Basal cell layer)
Stratum spinosum                     Differentiating cells
(Prickle cell layer)
Stratum granulosum                   So-called because cells lose their nuclei and contain
(Granular cell layer)                granules of keratohyaline. They secrete lipid into the
                                     intercellular spaces.
Stratum corneum                      Layer of keratin, most superficial layer
(Horny layer)

    •    In areas of thick skin such as the sole, there is a fifth layer, stratum lucidum, beneath
         the stratum corneum. This consists of paler, compact keratin.

    •    Pathology of the epidermis may involve:
                  a) changes in epidermal turnover time - e.g. psoriasis (reduced epidermal
                       turnover time)
                  b) changes in the surface of the skin or loss of epidermis - e.g. scales,
                       crusting, exudate, ulcer
                  c) changes in pigmentation of the skin - e.g. hypo- or hyper-pigmented skin

                                                   24                  British Association of Dermatologists
Background Knowledge – Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages
                                                                                                                       Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                          Dermis
                                                                             •     The dermis is made up of collagen (mainly), elastin and glycosaminoglycans, which
                                                                                   are synthesised by fibroblasts. Collectively, they provide the dermis with strength
                                                                                   and elasticity.
                                                                             •     The dermis also contains immune cells, nerves, skin appendages as well as lymphatic
                                                                                   and blood vessels.
                                                                             •     Pathology of the dermis may involve:
                                                                                           a) changes in the contour of the skin or loss of dermis e.g. formation of
                                                                                                papules, nodules, skin atrophy and ulcers
                                                                                           b) disorders of skin appendages e.g. disorders of hair, acne (disorder of
                                                                                                sebaceous glands)
                                                                                           c) changes related to lymphatic and blood vessels e.g. erythema
                                                                                                (vasodilatation), urticaria (increased permeability of capillaries and small
                                                                                                venules), purpura (capillary leakage)

                                                                          Hair
                                                                             •     There are 3 main types of hair:
                                                                                           a) lanugo hair (fine long hair in fetus)
                                                                                           b) vellus hair (fine short hair on all body surfaces)
                                                                                           c) terminal hair (coarse long hair on the scalp, eyebrows, eyelashes and
                                                                                                pubic areas)
                                                                             •     Each hair consists of modified keratin and is divided into the hair shaft (a keratinized
                                                                                   tube) and hair bulb (actively dividing cells, and melanocytes which give pigment to
                                                                                   the hair).
                                                                             •     Each hair follicle enters its own growth cycle. This occurs in 3 main phases:
                                                                                           a) anagen (long growing phase)
                                                                                           b) catagen (short regressing phase)
                                                                                           c) telogen (resting/shedding phase)
                                                                             •     Pathology of the hair may involve:
                                                                                           a) reduced or absent melanin pigment production e.g. grey or white hair
                                                                                           b) changes in duration of the growth cycle e.g. hair loss (premature entry of
                                                                                                hair follicles into the telogen phase)
                                                                                           c) shaft abnormalities

                                                                                                                            25                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                       Background Knowledge – Structure of normal skin and the skin appendages
                                      Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Nails
•   The nail is made up of a nail plate (hard keratin) which arises from the nail matrix at
    the posterior nail fold, and rests on the nail bed.
•   The nail bed contains blood capillaries which gives the pink colour of the nails.
•   Pathology of the nail may involve:
            a) abnormalities of the nail matrix e.g. pits and ridges
            b) abnormalities of the nail bed e.g. splinter haemorrhage
            c) abnormalities of the nail plate e.g. discoloured nails, thickening of nails

Sebaceous glands
•   Sebaceous glands produce sebum via hair follicles (collectively called a
    pilosebaceous unit). They secrete sebum onto the skin surface which lubricates and
    waterproofs the skin.
•   Sebaceous glands are stimulated by the conversion of androgens to
    dihydrotestosterone and therefore become active at puberty.
•   Pathology of sebaceous glands may involve:
            a) increased sebum production and bacterial colonisation e.g. acne
            b) sebaceous gland hyperplasia

Sweat glands
•   Sweat glands regulate body temperature and are innervated by the sympathetic
    nervous system.
•   They are divided into two types: eccrine and apocrine sweat glands.
•   Eccrine sweat glands are universally distributed in the skin.
•   Apocrine sweat glands are found in the axillae, areolae, genitalia and anus, and
    modified glands are found in the external auditory canal. They only function from
    puberty onwards and action of bacteria on the sweat produces body odour.
•   Pathology of sweat glands may involve:
            a) inflammation/infection of apocrine glands e.g. hidradenitis suppurativa
            b) overactivity of eccrine glands e.g. hyperhidrosis

                                           26                  British Association of Dermatologists
Background Knowledge – Principles of wound healing
                                                                                            Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                     Principles of wound healing

                                                         •   Wound healing occurs in 4 phases: haemostasis, inflammation, proliferation and
                                                             remodelling (Table 13).

                                                     Table 13. Stages of wound healing
                                                     Stages of wound healing                Mechanisms
                                                     Haemostasis                            ● Vasoconstriction and platelet aggregation

                                                                                            ● Clot formation

                                                     Inflammation                           ● Vasodilatation

                                                                                            ● Migration of neutrophils and macrophages

                                                                                            ● Phagocytosis of cellular debris and invading

                                                                                             bacteria

                                                     Proliferation                          ● Granulation tissue formation (synthesised by

                                                                                              fibroblasts) and angiogenesis
                                                                                            ● Re-epithelialisation (epidermal cell proliferation

                                                                                             and migration)

                                                     Remodelling                            ● Collagen fibre re-organisation

                                                                                            ● Scar maturation

                                                                                                 27                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                            Emergency Dermatology
                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Emergency Dermatology

 •   These are rapidly progressive skin conditions and some are potentially life-
     threatening. Early recognition is important to implement prompt supportive care
     and therapy.
 •   Some are drug reactions and the offending drug should be withdrawn.
 •   The essential management for all dermatological emergencies, like any emergency,
     consists of:
     i)          full supportive care - ABC of resuscitation
     ii)         withdrawal of precipitating agents
     iii)        management of associated complications
     iv)         specific treatment (highlighted below under each condition)

 Learning outcomes:
     1. Ability to recognise and describe these skin reactions:
            - urticaria
            - erythema nodosum
            - erythema multiforme

     2. Ability to recognise these emergency presentations, discuss the causes,
            potential complications and provide first contact care in these emergencies:
            - anaphylaxis and angioedema
            - toxic epidermal necrolysis
            - Stevens-Johnson syndrome
            - acute meningococcaemia
            - erythroderma
            - eczema herpeticum
            - necrotising fasciitis

                                                28                  British Association of Dermatologists
Emergency Dermatology – Urticaria, Angioedema and Anaphylaxis
                                                                                                        Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                Urticaria, Angioedema and Anaphylaxis

                                                                Causes                ● Idiopathic, food (e.g. nuts, sesame seeds, shellfish, dairy

                                                                                        products), drugs (e.g. penicillin, contrast media, non-steroidal anti-
                                                                                        inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), morphine, angiotensin-converting
                                                                                        enzyme inhibitors (ACE-i)), insect bites, contact (e.g. latex), viral or
                                                                                        parasitic infections, autoimmune, and hereditary (in some cases of
                                                                                        angioedema)
                                                                Description           ● Urticaria is due to a local increase in permeability of capillaries

                                                                                       and small venules. A large number of inflammatory mediators
                                                                                       (including prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and chemotactic factors)
                                                                                       play a role but histamine derived from skin mast cells appears to
                                                                                       be the major mediator. Local mediator release from mast cells can
                                                                                       be induced by immunological or non-immunological mechanisms.
                                                                Presentation          ● Urticaria (swelling involving the superficial dermis, raising the

                                                                                       epidermis): itchy wheals
                                                                                      ● Angioedema (deeper swelling involving the dermis and

                                                                                       subcutaneous tissues): swelling of tongue and lips
                                                                                      ● Anaphylaxis (also known as anaphylactic shock): bronchospasm,

                                                                                       facial and laryngeal oedema, hypotension; can present initially
                                                                                       with urticaria and angioedema
                                                                Management            ● Antihistamines for urticaria

                                                                                      ● Corticosteroids for severe acute urticaria and angioedema

                                                                                      ● Adrenaline, corticosteroids and antihistamines for anaphylaxis

                                                                Complications         ● Urticaria is normally uncomplicated

                                                                                      ● Angioedema and anaphylaxis can lead to asphyxia, cardiac arrest

                                                                                       and death

                                                                                  Urticaria                                       Angioedema

                                                                                                             29                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                     Emergency Dermatology – Erythema nodosum
                                    Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Erythema nodosum

Description        ● A hypersensitivity response to a variety of stimuli

Causes             ● Group A beta-haemolytic streptococcus, primary tuberculosis,

                    pregnancy, malignancy, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease
                    (IBD), chlamydia and leprosy

Presentation       ● Discrete tender nodules which may become confluent

                   ● Lesions continue to appear for 1-2 weeks and leave bruise-like

                    discolouration as they resolve
                   ● Lesions do not ulcerate and resolve without atrophy or scarring

                   ● The shins are the most common site

                                Erythema nodosum

                                         30                  British Association of Dermatologists
Emergency Dermatology – Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and Toxic epidermal necrolysis
                                                                                                                                                Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                       Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and Toxic epidermal necrolysis

                                                                                                       Description            ● Erythema multiforme, often of unknown cause, is an acute self-

                                                                                                                                limiting inflammatory condition with herpes simplex virus being
                                                                                                                                the main precipitating factor. Other infections and drugs are also
                                                                                                                                causes. Mucosal involvement is absent or limited to only one
                                                                                                                                mucosal surface.
                                                                                                                              ● Stevens-Johnson syndrome is characterised by

                                                                                                                                mucocutaneous necrosis with at least two mucosal sites involved.
                                                                                                                                Skin involvement may be limited or extensive. Drugs or
                                                                                                                                combinations of infections or drugs are the main associations.
                                                                                                                                Epithelial necrosis with few inflammatory cells is seen on
                                                                                                                                histopathology. The extensive necrosis distinguishes Stevens-
                                                                                                                                Johnson syndrome from erythema multiforme. Stevens-Johnson
                                                                                                                                syndrome may have features overlapping with toxic epidermal
                                                                                                                                necrolysis including a prodromal illness.
                                                                                                                              ● Toxic epidermal necrosis which is usually drug-induced, is

                                                                                                                                an acute severe similar disease characterised by extensive skin and
                                                                                                                                mucosal necrosis accompanied by systemic toxicity. On
                                                                                                                                histopathology there is full thickness epidermal necrosis with
                                                                                                                                subepidermal detachment.
                                                                                                       Management             ● Early recognition and call for help

                                                                                                                              ● Full supportive care to maintain haemodynamic equilibrium
                                                                                                       Complications          ● Mortality rates are 5-12% with SJS and >30% with TEN with
                                                                                                                                death often due to sepsis, electrolyte imbalance or multi-system
                                                                                                                                organ failure

                                                                                                                       Erythema multiforme                    Stevens-Johnson syndrome

                                                                                                                                                     31                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                Emergency Dermatology – Acute meningococcaemia
                                               Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Acute meningococcaemia

Description                 ● A serious communicable infection transmitted via respiratory

                              secretions; bacteria get into the circulating blood
Cause                       ● Gram negative diplococcus Neisseria meningitides

Presentation                ● Features of meningitis (e.g. headache, fever, neck stiffness),

                              septicaemia (e.g. hypotension, fever, myalgia) and a typical rash
                            ● Non-blanching purpuric rash on the trunk and extremities, which

                             may be preceded by a blanching maculopapular rash, and can
                              rapidly progress to ecchymoses, haemorrhagic bullae and tissue
                              necrosis
Management                  ● Antibiotics (e.g. benzylpenicillin)

                            ● Prophylactic antibiotics (e.g. rifampicin) for close contacts (ideally

                              within 14 days of exposure)
Complications               ● Septicaemic shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, multi-

                              organ failure and death

Further reading: Hart CA, Thomson APJ. Meningococcal disease and its management in children.
BMJ 2006;333:685-690 (http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/full/333/7570/685)

                                                    32                  British Association of Dermatologists
Emergency Dermatology – Erythroderma
                                                                                  Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                       Erythroderma (‘red skin’)

                                       Description            ● Exfoliative dermatitis involving at least 90% of the skin surface

                                       Causes                 ● Previous skin disease (e.g. eczema, psoriasis), lymphoma, drugs

                                                                   (e.g.sulphonamides, gold, sulphonylureas, penicillin, allopurinol,
                                                                   captopril) and idiopathic
                                       Presentation           ● Skin appears inflamed, oedematous and scaly

                                                              ● Systemically unwell with lymphadenopathy and malaise

                                       Management             ● Treat the underlying cause, where known

                                                              ● Emollients and wet-wraps to maintain skin moisture

                                                              ● Topical steroids may help to relieve inflammation

                                       Complications          ● Secondary infection, fluid loss and electrolyte imbalance,

                                                                   hypothermia, high-output cardiac failure and capillary leak
                                                                   syndrome (most severe)
                                       Prognosis              ● Largely depends on the underlying cause

                                                              ● Overall mortality rate ranges from 20 to 40%

                                                                                    Erythroderma

                                                                                       33                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                          Emergency Dermatology – Eczema herpeticum
                                         Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Eczema herpeticum (Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption)

Description            ● Widespread eruption - serious complication of atopic eczema or

                        less commonly other skin conditions
Cause                  ● Herpes simplex virus

Presentation           ● Extensive crusted papules, blisters and erosions

                       ● Systemically unwell with fever and malaise

Management             ● Antivirals (e.g. aciclovir)

                       ● Antibiotics for bacterial secondary infection

Complications          ● Herpes hepatitis, encephalitis, disseminated intravascular

                        coagulation (DIC) and rarely, death

                                         Eczema herpeticum

                                              34                  British Association of Dermatologists
Emergency Dermatology – Necrotising fasciitis
                                                                                                Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                Necrotising fasciitis

                                                Description                 ● A rapidly spreading infection of the deep fascia with secondary

                                                                              tissue necrosis
                                                Causes                      ● Group A haemolytic streptococcus, or a mixture of anaerobic and

                                                                              aerobic bacteria
                                                                            ● Risk factors include abdominal surgery and medical co-morbidities

                                                                              (e.g. diabetes, malignancy)
                                                                            ● 50% of cases occur in previously healthy individuals

                                                Presentation                ● Severe pain

                                                                            ● Erythematous, blistering, and necrotic skin

                                                                            ● Systemically unwell with fever and tachycardia

                                                                            ● Presence of crepitus (subcutaneous emphysema)

                                                                            ● X-ray may show soft tissue gas (absence should not exclude the

                                                                              diagnosis)
                                                Management                  ● Urgent referral for extensive surgical debridement

                                                                            ● Intravenous antibiotics

                                                Prognosis                   ● Mortality up to 76%

                                                Further reading: Hasham S, Matteucci P, Stanley PRW, Hart NB. Necrotising fasciitis. BMJ 2005;330:830-833
                                                (http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/full/330/7495/830)

                                                                                                     35                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                           Skin Infections / Infestations
                                          Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Skin Infections / Infestations

  •   The normal skin microflora and antimicrobial peptides protect the skin against
      infection. However, when there is skin damage, microorganisms can penetrate
      resulting in infection.
  •   There are 3 main types of skin infections according to their sources: bacterial (e.g.
      staphylococcal and streptococcal), viral (e.g. human papilloma virus, herpes simplex
      (see page 34) and herpes zoster (see below)), and fungal (e.g. tinea (see page 39 &
      40), candida (see page 39 & 40) and yeasts). Infestations (e.g. scabies (see page 58 &
      59), cutaneous leishmaniasis) can also occur.

            Herpes zoster (shingles) infection due to varicella-zoster virus affecting the
            distribution of the ophthalmic division of the fifth cranial (trigeminal) nerve
            Note: Examination for eye involvement is important

Learning outcomes:
      Ability to describe the presentation, investigation and management of:
      - cellulitis and erysipelas
      - staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
      - superficial fungal infections

                                               36                  British Association of Dermatologists
Skin Infections and Infestations – Erysipelas and Cellulitis
                                                                                                             Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                               Erysipelas and Cellulitis

                                                               Description                 ● Spreading bacterial infection of the skin

                                                                                           ● Cellulitis involves the deep subcutaneous tissue

                                                                                           ● Erysipelas is an acute superficial form of cellulitis and involves

                                                                                            the dermis and upper subcutaneous tissue
                                                               Causes                      ● Streptococcus pyogenes and Staphylococcus aureus

                                                                                           ● Risk factors include immunosuppression, wounds, leg ulcers,

                                                                                            toeweb intertrigo, and minor skin injury
                                                               Presentation                ● Most common in the lower limbs

                                                                                           ● Local signs of inflammation – swelling (tumor), erythema (rubor),

                                                                                             warmth (calor), pain (dolor); may be associated with lymphangitis
                                                                                           ● Systemically unwell with fever, malaise or rigors, particularly with

                                                                                            erysipelas
                                                                                           ● Erysipelas is distinguished from cellulitis by a well-defined, red

                                                                                             raised border
                                                               Management                  ● Antibiotics (e.g. flucloxacillin or benzylpenicillin)

                                                                                           ● Supportive care including rest, leg elevation, sterile dressings and

                                                                                            analgesia
                                                               Complications               ● Local necrosis, abscess and septicaemia

                                                                         Cellulitis with elephantiasis of the penis                       Erysipelas

                                                                                                                  37                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                         Skin Infections and Infestations – Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
                                        Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome

Description           ● Commonly seen in infancy and early childhood

Cause                 ● Production of a circulating epidermolytic toxin from phage group

                       II, benzylpenicillin-resistant (coagulase positive) staphylococci
Presentation          ● Develops within a few hours to a few days, and may be worse over

                       the face, neck, axillae or groins
                      ● A scald-like skin appearance is followed by large flaccid bulla

                      ● Perioral crusting is typical

                      ● There is intraepidermal blistering in this condition

                      ● Lesions are very painful

                      ● Sometimes the eruption is more localised

                      ● Recovery is usually within 5-7 days

Management            ● Antibiotics (e.g. a systemic penicillinase-resistant penicillin,

                       fusidic acid, erythromycin or appropriate cephalosporin)
                      ● Analgesia

                         Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome

                                             38                  British Association of Dermatologists
Skin Infections and Infestations – Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
                                                                                                                      Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                          Superficial fungal infections

                                                                          Description             ● A common and mild infection of the superficial layers of the skin,

                                                                                                     nails and hair, but can be severe in immunocompromised
                                                                                                     individuals
                                                                          Cause                   ● Three main groups: dermatophytes (tinea/ringworm), yeasts (e.g.

                                                                                                    candidiasis, malassezia), moulds (e.g. aspergillus)
                                                                          Presentation            ● Varies with the site of infection; usually unilateral and itchy

                                                                                                  ● Tinea corporis (tinea infection of the trunk and limbs) - Itchy,

                                                                                                    circular or annular lesions with a clearly defined, raised and scaly
                                                                                                    edge is typical
                                                                                                  ● Tinea cruris (tinea infection of the groin and natal cleft) – very

                                                                                                     itchy, similar to tinea corporis
                                                                                                  ● Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot) – moist scaling and fissuring in

                                                                                                    toewebs, spreading to the sole and dorsal aspect of the foot
                                                                                                  ● Tinea manuum (tinea infection of the hand) – scaling and dryness

                                                                                                    in the palmar creases
                                                                                                  ● Tinea capitis (scalp ringworm) – patches of broken hair, scaling

                                                                                                    and inflammation
                                                                                                  ● Tinea unguium (tinea infection of the nail) – yellow discolouration,

                                                                                                    thickened and crumbly nail
                                                                                                  ● Tinea incognito (inappropriate treatment of tinea infection with

                                                                                                    topical or systemic corticosteroids) – Ill-defined and less scaly
                                                                                                    lesions
                                                                                                  ● Candidiasis (candidal skin infection) – white plaques on mucosal

                                                                                                    areas, erythema with satellite lesions in flexures
                                                                                                  ● Pityriasis/Tinea versicolor (infection with Malassezia furfur) – scaly

                                                                                                    pale brown patches on upper trunk that fail to tan on sun
                                                                                                    exposure, usually asymptomatic

                                                                          Management              ● Establish the correct diagnosis by skin scrapings, hair or nail

                                                                                                    clippings (for dermatophytes); skin swabs (for yeasts)
                                                                                                  ● General measures: treat known precipitating factors (e.g.

                                                                                                    underlying immunosuppressive condition, moist environment)

                                                                                                                           39                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                     Skin Infections and Infestations – Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
                                    Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                  ● Topical antifungal agents (e.g. terbinafine cream)

                  ● Oral antifungal agents (e.g. itraconazole) for severe, widespread,

                    or nail infections
                  ● Avoid the use of topical steroids – can lead to tinea incognito

                  ● Correct predisposing factors where possible (e.g. moist

                    environment, underlying immunosuppression)

   Tinea corporis                                           Tinea capitis

Tinea manuum (right hand)                     Tinea pedis with associated tinea unguium

 Candidiasis (right axilla)                               Pityriasis versicolor

                                         40                  British Association of Dermatologists
Skin Cancer
                                                     Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

              Skin Cancer

                •   Skin cancer is one of the most common cancers.
                •   In general, skin cancer can be divided into: non-melanoma (basal cell carcinoma and
                    squamous cell carcinoma) and melanoma (malignant melanoma).
                •   Malignant melanoma is the most life-threatening type of skin cancer and is one of
                    the few cancers affecting the younger population.
                •   Sun exposure is the single most preventable risk factor for skin cancer.

              Learning outcomes:
                    Ability to recognise:
                    - basal cell carcinoma
                    - squamous cell carcinoma
                    - malignant melanoma

                                                          41                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                           Skin Cancer – Basal cell carcinoma
                                        Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Basal cell carcinoma

Description            ● A slow-growing, locally invasive malignant tumour of the

                        epidermal keratinocytes normally in older individuals, only rarely
                        metastasises
                       ● Most common malignant skin tumour

Causes                 ● Risk factors include UV exposure, history of frequent or severe

                        sunburn in childhood, skin type I (always burns, never tans),
                        increasing age, male sex, immunosuppression, previous history of
                        skin cancer, and genetic predisposition
Presentation           ● Various morphological types including nodular (most common),

                        superficial (plaque-like), cystic, morphoeic (sclerosing), keratotic
                        and pigmented
                       ● Nodular basal cell carcinoma is a small, skin-coloured papule or

                        nodule with surface telangiectasia, and a pearly rolled edge; the
                        lesion may have a necrotic or ulcerated centre (rodent ulcer)
                       ● Most common over the head and neck

Management             ● Surgical excision - treatment of choice as it allows histological

                        examination of the tumour and margins
                       ● Mohs micrographic surgery (i.e. excision of the lesion and tissue

                        borders are progressively excised until specimens are
                        microscopically free of tumour) - for high risk, recurrent tumours
                       ● Radiotherapy - when surgery is not appropriate

                       ● Other e.g. cryotherapy, curettage and cautery, topical

                        photodynamic therapy, and topical treatment (e.g. imiquimod
                        cream) - for small and low-risk lesions
Complications          ● Local tissue invasion and destruction

Prognosis              ● Depends on tumour size, site, type, growth pattern/histological

                        subtype, failure of previous treatment/recurrence, and
                        immunosuppression

                             Basal cell carcinoma – nodular type

                                             42                    British Association of Dermatologists
Skin Cancer – Squamous cell carcinoma
                                                                                     Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        Squamous cell carcinoma

                                        Description               ● A locally invasive malignant tumour of the epidermal

                                                                    keratinocytes or its appendages, which has the potential to
                                                                    metastasise
                                        Causes                    ● Risk factors include excessive UV exposure, pre-malignant skin

                                                                    conditions (e.g. actinic keratoses), chronic inflammation (e.g. leg
                                                                    ulcers, wound scars), immunosuppression and genetic
                                                                    predisposition
                                        Presentation              ● Keratotic (e.g. scaly, crusty), ill-defined nodule which may ulcerate

                                        Management                ● Surgical excision - treatment of choice

                                                                  ● Mohs micrographic surgery – may be necessary for ill-defined,

                                                                    large, recurrent tumours
                                                                  ● Radiotherapy - for large, non-resectable tumours
                                        Prognosis                 ● Depends on tumour size, site, histological pattern, depth

                                                                    of invasion, perineural involvement, and immunosuppression

                                                       Squamous cell carcinoma – adjacent to ear (left) and glans penis (right)

                                                                                          43                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                       Skin Cancer – Malignant melanoma
                                      Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Malignant melanoma

Description          ● An invasive malignant tumour of the epidermal melanocytes,

                      which has the potential to metastasise
Causes               ● Risk factors include excessive UV exposure, skin type I (always

                      burns, never tans), history of multiple moles or atypical moles, and
                      family history or previous history of melanoma
Presentation         ● The ‘ABCDE Symptoms’ rule (*major suspicious features):

                             Asymmetrical shape*
                             Border irregularity
                             Colour irregularity*
                             Diameter > 6mm
                             Evolution of lesion (e.g. change in size and/or shape)*
                             Symptoms (e.g. bleeding, itching)
                     ● More common on the legs in women and trunk in men

Types                ● Superficial spreading melanoma – common on the lower limbs,

                      in young and middle-aged adults; related to intermittent high-
                      intensity UV exposure
                     ● Nodular melanoma - common on the trunk, in young and middle-

                      aged adults; related to intermittent high-intensity UV exposure
                     ● Lentigo maligna melanoma - common on the face, in elderly

                      population; related to long-term cumulative UV exposure
                     ● Acral lentiginous melanoma - common on the palms, soles and nail

                      beds, in elderly population; no clear relation with UV exposure
Management           ● Surgical excision - definitive treatment

                     ● Radiotherapy may sometimes be useful

                     ● Chemotherapy for metastatic disease

Prognosis            ● Recurrence of melanoma based on Breslow thickness (thickness of

                      tumour): <0.76mm thick – low risk, 0.76mm-1.5mm thick –
                      medium risk, >1.5mm thick – high risk
                     ● 5-year survival rates based on the TNM classification (primary

                      Tumour, regional Nodes, Metastases): stage 1 (T <2mm thick, N0,
                      M0) - 90%, stage 2 (T>2mm thick, N0, M0) – 80%, stage 3 (N≥1,
                      M0) – 40- 50%, and stage 4 (M ≥ 1) – 20-30%

                                           44                  British Association of Dermatologists
Skin Cancer – Malignant melanoma
                                                                    Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                   Superficial spreading melanoma                          Nodular melanoma

                                    Lentigo maligna melanoma                          Acral lentiginous melanoma

                                                                         45                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                        Inflammatory Skin Conditions
                                       Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Inflammatory Skin Conditions

  •   Eczema, acne and psoriasis are chronic inflammatory skin disorders that follow a
      relapsing and remitting course. There are many types of eczema but we shall just
      consider atopic eczema here.
  •   These skin disorders are not infectious.
  •   Management is aimed at achieving control and not providing a cure.
  •   Complications are mainly due to the psychological and social effects.
  •   Patient education is important in these chronic skin conditions and should
      concentrate on providing information about the nature of condition, aims of
      treatment and the available treatment options.

Learning outcomes:
      Ability to describe the presentation, demonstrate assessment, formulate a
      differential diagnosis, instigate investigation and discuss how to provide
      continuing care of:
      - atopic eczema
      - acne
      - psoriasis

                                            46                  British Association of Dermatologists
Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Atopic eczema
                                                                                  Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                               Atopic eczema

                                               Description     ● Eczema (or dermatitis) is characterized by papules and vesicles on

                                                                an erythematous base
                                                               ● Atopic eczema is the most common type - usually develops by

                                                                early childhood and resolves during teenage years (but may recur)
                                               Epidemiology    ● 20% prevalence in <12 years old in the UK

                                               Causes          ● Not fully understood, but a positive family history of atopy (i.e.

                                                                eczema, asthma, allergic rhinitis) is often present
                                                               ● A primary genetic defect in skin barrier function (loss of function

                                                                variants of the protein filaggrin) appears to underlie atopic eczema
                                                               ● Exacerbating factors such as infections, allergens (e.g. chemicals,

                                                                food, dust, pet fur), sweating, heat and severe stress
                                               Presentation    ● Commonly present as itchy, erythematous dry scaly patches

                                                               ● More common on the face and extensor aspects of limbs in

                                                                infants, and the flexor aspects in children and adults
                                                               ● Acute lesions are erythematous, vesicular and weepy (exudative)

                                                               ● Chronic scratching/rubbing can lead to excoriations and

                                                                lichenification
                                                               ● May show nail pitting and ridging of the nails

                                               Management      ● General measures - avoid known exacerbating agents, frequent

                                                                emollients +/- bandages and bath oil/soap substitute
                                                               ● Topical therapies – topical steroids for flare-ups; topical

                                                                immunomodulators (e.g. tacrolimus, pimecrolimus) can be
                                                                used as steroid-sparing agents
                                                               ● Oral therapies - antihistamines for symptomatic relief, antibiotics

                                                                (e.g. flucloxacillin) for secondary bacterial infections, and
                                                                antivirals (e.g. aciclovir) for secondary herpes infection
                                                               ● Phototherapy and immunosuppressants (e.g. oral prednisolone,

                                                                azathioprine, ciclosporin) for severe non- responsive cases
                                               Complications   ● Secondary bacterial infection (crusted weepy lesions)

                                                               ● Secondary viral infection - molluscum contagiosum (pearly

                                                                papules with central umbilication), viral warts and eczema
                                                                herpeticum (see page 34)

                                                                                       47                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                 Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Atopic eczema
                                               Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                              Atopic eczema

Further reading: NICE guidelines. Atopic eczema in children, Dec 2007. http://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/CG57

                                                     48                  British Association of Dermatologists
Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Acne vulgaris
                                                                                       Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                               Acne vulgaris

                                               Description          ● An inflammatory disease of the pilosebaceous follicle

                                               Epidemiology         ● Over 80% of teenagers aged 13- 18 years

                                               Causes               ● Hormonal (androgen)

                                                                    ● Contributing factors include increased sebum production,

                                                                      abnormal follicular keratinization, bacterial colonization
                                                                      (Propionibacterium acnes) and inflammation
                                               Presentation         ● Non-inflammatory lesions (mild acne) - open and closed

                                                                      comedones (blackheads and whiteheads)
                                                                    ● Inflammatory lesions (moderate and severe acne) - papules,

                                                                      pustules, nodules, and cysts
                                                                    ● Commonly affects the face, chest and upper back

                                               Management           ● General measures - no specific food has been identified to cause

                                                                      acne, treatment needs to be continued for at least 6 weeks to
                                                                      produce effect
                                                                    ● Topical therapies (for mild acne) - benzoyl peroxide and topical

                                                                      antibiotics (antimicrobial properties), and topical retinoids
                                                                      (comedolytic and anti-inflammatory properties)
                                                                    ● Oral therapies (for moderate to severe acne) - oral antibiotics, and

                                                                      anti-androgens (in females)
                                                                    ● Oral retinoids (for severe acne)

                                               Complications        ● Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, scarring, deformity,

                                                                      psychological and social effects

                                                               Comedones                                    Papules and nodules

                                                                                            49                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                 Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Psoriasis
                                Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Psoriasis

Description    ● A chronic inflammatory skin disease due to hyperproliferation of

                keratinocytes and inflammatory cell infiltration
Types          ● Chronic plaque psoriasis is the most common type

               ● Other types include guttate (raindrop lesions), seborrhoeic

                (naso-labial and retro-auricular), flexural (body folds), pustular
                (palmar-plantar), and erythrodermic (total body redness)
Epidemiology   ● Affects about 2% of the population in the UK

Causes         ● Complex interaction between genetic, immunological and

                environmental factors
               ● Precipitating factors include trauma (which may produce a

                Köebner phenomenon), infection (e.g. tonsillitis), drugs, stress,
                and alcohol
Presentation   ● Well-demarcated erythematous scaly plaques

               ● Lesions can sometimes be itchy, burning or painful

               ● Common on the extensor surfaces of the body and over scalp

               ● Auspitz sign (scratch and gentle removal of scales cause capillary

                bleeding)
               ● 50% have associated nail changes (e.g. pitting, onycholysis)

               ● 5-8% suffer from associated psoriatic arthropathy - symmetrical

                polyarthritis, asymmetrical oligomonoarthritis, lone distal
                interphalangeal disease, psoriatic spondylosis, and arthritis
                mutilans (flexion deformity of distal interphalangeal joints)
Management     ● General measures - avoid known precipitating factors, emollients

                 to reduce scales
               ● Topical therapies (for localised and mild psoriasis) - vitamin D

                analogues, topical corticosteroids, coal tar preparations,
                dithranol, topical retinoids, keratolytics and scalp preparations
               ● Phototherapy (for extensive disease) - phototherapy i.e. UVB and

                photochemotherapy i.e. psoralen+UVA
               ● Oral therapies (for extensive and severe psoriasis, or psoriasis

                with systemic involvement) - methotrexate, retinoids,
                ciclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil, fumaric acid esters,

                                     50                  British Association of Dermatologists
Inflammatory Skin Conditions – Psoriasis
                                                                                    Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                    and biological agents (e.g. infliximab, etanercept, efalizumab)
                                           Complications          ● Erythroderma (see page 33), psychological and social effects

                                                   Köebner phenomenon                                      Plaque psoriasis

                                                     Nail changes and arthropathy                          Scalp involvement

                                                                                         51                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                              Blistering Disorders
                                             Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

 Blistering Disorders

    •     In general, blistering skin disorders can be divided into: immunobullous diseases
          (e.g. bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris), blistering skin infections (e.g. herpes
          simplex) and other (e.g. porphyria cutanea tarda).
    •     The fragility of blisters depends on the level of split within the skin – an intra-
          epidermal split (a split within the epidermis) causes blisters to rupture easily;
          whereas a sub-epidermal split (a split between the epidermis and dermis) causes
          blisters to be less fragile.
    •     The common causes of blisters are impetigo (see below), insect bites, herpes simplex
          infection (see page 34), herpes zoster infection (see page 36), acute contact
          dermatitis, pompholyx (vesicular eczema of the hands and feet, see below) and
          burns.
    •     Bullous pemphigoid (see page 53) and pemphigus vulgaris (see page 54) are
          uncommon conditions due to immune reaction within the skin.

Bullous impetigo in a new tattoo                                 Pompholyx

 Learning outcomes:
        1. Ability to recognise common causes of blisters

        2. Ability to recognise:
            - Bullous pemphigoid
            - Pemphigus vulgaris

                                                  52                  British Association of Dermatologists
Blistering Disorders – Bullous pemphigoid
                                                                                  Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                            Bullous pemphigoid

                                            Description          ● A blistering skin disorder which usually affects the elderly

                                            Cause                ● Autoantibodies against antigens between the epidermis and

                                                                  dermis causing a sub-epidermal split in the skin
                                            Presentation         ● Tense, fluid-filled blisters on an erythematous base

                                                                 ● Lesions are often itchy

                                                                 ● May be preceded by a non-specific itchy rash

                                                                 ● Usually affects the trunk and limbs (mucosal involvement less

                                                                  common)
                                            Management           ● General measures – wound dressings where required, monitor

                                                                  for signs of infection
                                                                 ● Topical therapies for localised disease - topical steroids

                                                                 ● Oral therapies for widespread disease – oral steroids, combination

                                                                  of oral tetracycline and nicotinamide, immunosuppressive agents
                                                                  (e.g. azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate, and
                                                                  other)

                                                                           Bullous pemphigoid

                                                                                       53                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                       Blistering Disorders – Pemphigus vulgaris
                                      Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Pemphigus vulgaris

Description          ● A blistering skin disorder which usually affects the middle-aged

Cause                ● Autoantibodies against antigens within the epidermis causing an

                       intra-epidermal split in the skin
Presentation         ● Flaccid, easily ruptured blisters forming erosions and crusts

                     ● Lesions are often painful

                     ● Usually affects the mucosal areas (can precede skin involvement)

Management           ● General measures – wound dressings where required, monitor for

                       signs of infection, good oral care (if oral mucosa is involved)
                     ● Oral therapies – high-dose oral steroids, immunosuppressive

                       agents (e.g. methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide,
                       mycophenolate mofetil, and other)

                               Pemphigus vulgaris

                     Pemphigus vulgaris affecting the oral mucosa

                                           54                  British Association of Dermatologists
Common Important Problems
                                                                   Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                            Common Important Problems

                              •   There are several commonly-encountered skin problems in clinical practice. Below
                                  are some of the important differential diagnoses for each of these presentations.
                              •   Clinical exposure is the key to achieve competence in diagnosing, investigating and
                                  managing these skin problems.

                            Learning objectives:
                                   Ability to formulate a differential diagnosis, describe the investigation and
                                   discuss the management in patients with:
                                   - chronic leg ulcers
                                   - itchy eruption
                                   - a changing pigmented lesion
                                   - purpuric eruption
                                   - a red swollen leg

                                                                        55
                                                                                   Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        Chronic leg ulcers

                                            •   Leg ulcers are classified according to aetiology. In general, there are three main types: venous, arterial and neuropathic ulcers. Other causes include
                                                vasculitic ulcers (purpuric, punched out lesions), infected ulcers (purulent discharge, may have systemic signs) and malignancy (e.g. squamous cell
                                                carcinoma in long-standing non-healing ulcers).
                                            •   In clinical practice, there can be mixture of arterial, venous and/or neuropathic components in an ulcer.

56

                                                                    Venous ulcer                                          Arterial ulcer                               Neuropathic ulcer

British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                            56                                      British Association of Dermatologists

                                                                                                                                                            Common Important Problems – Chronic leg ulcers
                                                                                                                                                          Common Important Problems – Chronic leg ulcers
                                                                                  Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        Chronic leg ulcers

                                                                         Venous ulcer                                        Arterial ulcer                             Neuropathic ulcer
                                        History          - Often painful, worse on standing                 - Painful especially at night, worse when     - Often painless
                                                         - History of venous disease e.g. varicose            legs are elevated                           - Abnormal sensation
                                                           veins, deep vein thrombosis                      - History of arterial disease e.g.            - History of diabetes or neurological disease
                                                                                                              atherosclerosis
                                        Common sites     - Malleolar area (more common over                 - Pressure and trauma sites e.g. pretibial,   - Pressure sites e.g. soles, heel, toes,
                                                           medial than lateral malleolus)                     supramalleolar (usually lateral), and at      metatarsal heads
                                                                                                              distal points e.g. toes
                                        Lesion           - Large, shallow irregular ulcer                   - Small, sharply defined deep ulcer           - Variable size and depth
                                                         - Exudative and granulating base                   - Necrotic base                               - Granulating base
                                                                                                                                                          - May be surrounded by or underneath a
57                                                                                                                                                          hyperkeratotic lesion (e.g. callus)
                                        Associated       - Warm skin                                        - Cold skin                                   - Warm skin
                                        features         - Normal peripheral pulses                         - Weak or absent peripheral pulses            - Normal peripheral pulses*
                                                         - Leg oedema, haemosiderin and melanin             - Shiny pale skin                               *cold, weak or absent pulses if it is a
                                                           deposition (brown pigment),                      - Loss of hair                                  neuroischaemic ulcer
                                                           lipodermatosclerosis, and atrophie                                                             - Peripheral neuropathy
                                                           blanche (white scarring with dilated
                                                           capillaries)
                                        Possible         - Normal ankle/brachial pressure index             - ABPI < 0.8 - presence of arterial           - ABPI < 0.8 implies a neuroischaemic ulcer
                                        investigations     (i.e. ABPI 0.8-1)                                  insufficiency                               - X-ray to exclude osteomyelitis
                                                                                                            - Doppler studies and angiography
                                        Management       - Compression bandaging                            - Vascular reconstruction                     - Wound debridement
                                                           (after excluding arterial insufficiency)         - Compression bandaging is contraindicated    - Regular repositioning, appropriate
                                                                                                                                                            footwear and good nutrition
British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                           57                                         British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                 Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        Itchy eruption

                                           •   An itchy (pruritic) eruption can be caused by an inflammatory condition (e.g. eczema), infection (e.g. varicella), infestation (e.g. scabies), allergic
                                               reaction (e.g. some cases of urticaria) or an unknown cause, possibly autoimmune (e.g. lichen planus).

58

                                         Chronic fissured hand eczema                    Scabies                            Urticaria           Lichen planus                  Wickham’s striae

British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                          58                                          British Association of Dermatologists

                                                                                                                                                                Common Important Problems – Itchy eruption
                                                                                                                                                                    Common Important Problems – Itchy eruption
                                                                                  Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        Itchy eruption

                                                                       Eczema                              Scabies                                 Urticaria                          Lichen planus
                                        History          - Personal or family history of      - May have history of contact           - Precipitating factors (e.g. food,   - Family history in 10% of cases
                                                           atopy                                with symptomatic individuals            contact, drugs)                     - May be drug-induced
                                                         - Exacerbating factors (e.g.         - Pruritus worse at night
                                                           allergens, irritants)
                                        Common sites     - Variable (e.g. flexor aspects in   - Sides of fingers, finger webs,        - No specific tendency                - Forearms, wrists, and legs
                                                           children and adults with atopic      wrists, elbows, ankles, feet,                                               - Always examine the oral
                                                           eczema)                              nipples and genitals                                                          mucosa
                                        Lesion           - Dry, erythematous patches          - Linear burrows (may be                - Pink wheals (transient)             - Violaceous (lilac) flat-topped
                                                         - Acute eczema is                      tortuous) or rubbery nodules          - May be round, annular, or             papules
                                                           erythematous, vesicular and                                                  polycyclic                          - Symmetrical distribution
                                                           exudative
59
                                        Associated       - Secondary bacterial or viral       - Secondary eczema and                  - May be associated with              - Nail changes and hair loss
                                        features           infections                           impetigo                                angioedema or anaphylaxis           - Lacy white streaks on the oral
                                                                                                                                                                              mucosa and skin lesions
                                                                                                                                                                              (Wickham’s striae)
                                        Possible         - Patch testing                      - Skin scrape, extraction of mite       - Bloods and urinalysis to            - Skin biopsy
                                        investigations   - Serum IgE levels                     and view under microscope               exclude a systemic cause
                                                         - Skin swab
                                        Management       - Emollients                         - Scabicide (e.g. permethrin            - Antihistamines                      - Corticosteroids
                                                         - Corticosteroids                      or malathion)                         - Corticosteroids                     - Antihistamines
                                                         - Immunomodulators                   - Antihistamines
                                                         - Antihistamines

British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                           59                                               British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                               Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        A changing pigmented lesion

                                           •   A changing pigmented lesion can be benign (e.g. melanocytic naevi, seborrhoeic wart) or malignant (e.g. malignant melanoma).

60

                                                        Congenital naevus                                  Seborrhoeic keratoses                        Malignant melanoma

British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                        60                                   British Association of Dermatologists

                                                                                                                                             Common Important Problems – A changing pigmented lesion
                                                                                                                                            Common Important Problems – A changing pigmented lesion
                                                                              Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        A changing pigmented lesion

                                                                                                   Benign                                                              Malignant
                                                                     Melanocytic naevi                               Seborrhoeic wart                            Malignant melanoma
                                        History        - Not usually present at birth but develop      - Tend to arise in the middle-aged or elderly - Tend to occur in adults or the middle-aged
                                                         during infancy, childhood or adolescence      - Often multiple and asymptomatic             - History of evolution of lesion
                                                       - Asymptomatic                                                                                - May be symptomatic (e.g. itchy, bleeding)
                                                                                                                                                     - Presence of risk factors
                                        Common sites   - Variable                                      - Face and trunk                               - More common on the legs in women and
                                                                                                                                                        trunk in men
                                        Lesion         - Congenital naevi may be large,                - Warty greasy papules or nodules             - Features of ABCDE:
                                                         pigmented, protuberant and hairy              - ‘Stuck on’ appearance, with well-defined           Asymmetrical shape
                                                       - Junctional naevi are small, flat and dark        edges                                             Border irregularity
                                                       - Intradermal naevi are usually dome-shape                                                           Colour irregularity
61
                                                         papules or nodules                                                                                 Diameter > 6mm
                                                       - Compound naevi are usually raised, warty,                                                          Evolution of lesion
                                                         hyperkeratotic, and/or hairy
                                        Management     - Rarely needed                                 - Rarely needed                               - Excision

British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                       61                                       British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        Purpuric eruption

                                           •   A purpuric eruption can be thrombocytopenic (e.g. meningococcal septicaemia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, idiopathic
                                               thrombocytopenic purpura) or non-thrombocytopenic e.g. trauma, drugs (e.g. steroids), aged skin, vasculitis (e.g. Henoch-Schönlein purpura).
                                           •   Platelet counts and a clotting screen are important to exclude coagulation disorders.

62

                                                                         Henoch-Schönlein purpura                                             Senile purpura
British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                         62                                       British Association of Dermatologists

                                                                                                                                                           Common Important Problems – Purpuric eruption
                                                                                                                                                               Common Important Problems – Purpuric eruption
                                                                               Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        Purpuric eruption

                                                            Meningococcal septicaemia          Disseminated intravascular                      Vasculitis                      Senile purpura
                                                                                                      coagulation
                                        History          - Acute onset                     - History of trauma, malignancy,        - Painful lesions                 - Arise in the elderly population
                                                         - Symptoms of meningitis and        sepsis, obstetric complications,                                          with sun-damaged skin
                                                           septicaemia                       transfusions, or liver failure
                                        Common sites     - Extremities                     - Spontaneous bleeding from             - Dependent areas (e.g. legs,     - Extensor surfaces of hands
                                                                                             ear, nose and throat,                   buttocks, flanks)                 and forearms
                                                                                             gastrointestinal tract,                                                 - Such skin is easily traumatised
                                                                                             respiratory tract or wound site
                                        Lesion           - Petechiae, ecchymoses,          - Petechiae, ecchymoses,                - Palpable purpura (often         - Non-palpable purpura
                                                           haemorrhagic bullae and/or        haemorragic bullae and/or               painful)                        - Surrounding skin is atrophic
                                                           tissue necrosis                   tissue necrosis                                                           and thin
63
                                        Associated       - Systemically unwell             - Systemically unwell                   - Systemically unwell             - Systemically well
                                        features
                                        Possible         - Bloods                          - Bloods (a clotting screen is          - Bloods and urinalysis           - No investigation is needed
                                        investigations   - Lumbar puncture                   important)                            - Skin biopsy

                                        Management       - Antibiotics                     - Treat the underlying cause            - Treat the underlying cause      - No treatment is needed
                                                                                           - Transfuse for coagulation             - Steroids and
                                                                                             deficiencies                            immunosuppressants if there
                                                                                           - Anticoagulants for thrombosis           is systemic involvement

British Association of Dermatologists

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Common Important Problems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                        63                                           British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                   Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                        A red swollen leg

                                           •      The main differential diagnoses for a red swollen leg are cellulitis, erysipelas, venous thrombosis and chronic venous insufficiency.

                                                                         Cellulitis/Erysipelas                                   Venous thrombosis                   Chronic venous insufficiency
                                        History           - Painful spreading rash                               - Pain with swelling and redness               - Heaviness or aching of leg, which is
                                                          - History of abrasion or ulcer                         - History of prolonged bed rest, long haul       worse on standing and relieved by
                                                                                                                   flights or clotting tendency                   walking
                                                                                                                                                                - History of venous thrombosis
                                        Lesion            - Erysipelas (well-defined edge)                       - Complete venous occlusion may lead to        - Discoloured (blue-purple)
                                                          - Cellulitis (diffuse edge)                              cyanotic discolouration                      - Oedema (improved in the morning)
                                                                                                                                                                - Venous congestion and varicose veins
64                                      Associated        - Systemically unwell with fever and malaise           - Usually systemically well                    - Lipodermatosclerosis (erythematous
                                        features          - May have lymphangitis                                - May present with pulmonary embolism            induration, creating ‘champagne
                                                                                                                                                                  bottle’ appearance)
                                                                                                                                                                - Stasis dermatitis (eczema with
                                                                                                                                                                  inflammatory papules, scaly and
                                                                                                                                                                  crusted erosions)
                                                                                                                                                                - Venous ulcer
                                        Possible       - Anti-streptococcal O titre (ASOT)                       - D-dimer                                      - Doppler ultrasound and/or venography
                                        investigations - Skin swab                                               - Doppler ultrasound and/or venography
                                        Management - Antibiotics                                                 - Anticoagulants                               - Leg elevation and compression
                                                                                                                                                                  stockings
                                                                                                                                                                - Sclerotherapy or surgery for varicose
                                                                                                                                                                  veins
British Association of Dermatologists

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Common Important Problems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                            64                                        British Association of Dermatologists

                                                                                                                                                              Common Important Problems – A red swollen leg
Management
                                                      Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

              Management
             Management and therapeutics

                •   Treatment modalities for skin disease can be broadly categorised into medical
                    therapy (topical and systemic treatments) and physical therapy (e.g. cryotherapy,
                    phototherapy, photodynamic therapy, lasers and surgery).
                •   Topical treatments directly deliver treatment to the affected areas and this reduces
                    systemic side effects. It is suitable for localised and less severe skin conditions. They
                    consist of active constituents which are transported into the skin by a base (also
                    known as a ‘vehicle’). Examples of active ingredients are steroids, tar,
                    immunomodulators, retinoids, and antibiotics. The common forms of base are lotion
                    (liquid), cream (oil in water), gel (organic polymers in liquid, transparent), ointment
                    (oil with little or no water) and paste (powder in ointment).
                •   Systemic therapy is used for extensive and more serious skin conditions, if the
                    treatment is ineffective topically or if there is systemic involvement. However, they
                    have the disadvantage of causing systemic side effects.

              Learning objectives:

                     Ability to describe the principles of use of the following drugs:
                     - emollients
                     - topical/oral corticosteroids
                     - oral aciclovir
                     - oral antihistamines
                     - topical/oral antibiotics
                     - topical antiseptics

                                                           65                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                            Management – Emollients, Topical/Oral corticosteroids, Oral acyclovir, Oral antihistamines
                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Emollients
Examples         ● Aqueous cream, emulsifying ointment, liquid paraffin and white soft

                  paraffin in equal parts (50:50)
Quantity         ● 500 grams per tub

Indications      ● To rehydrate skin and re-establish the surface lipid layer

                 ● Useful for dry, scaling conditions and as soap substitutes

Side effects     ● Reactions may be irritant or allergic (e.g. due to preservatives or perfumes

                  in creams)

Topical/Oral corticosteroids
Examples         ● Topical steroids: classified as mildly potent (e.g, hydrocortisone),

                  moderately potent (e.g. clobetasone butyrate (Eumovate)), potent
                  (e.g.betamethasone valerate (Betnovate)), and very potent (e.g. clobetasol
                  propionate (Dermovate))
                 ● Oral steroids: prednisolone

Quantity         ● Usually 30 grams per tube (enough to cover the whole body once)
Indications      ● Anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative effects

                 ● Useful for allergic and immune reactions, inflammatory skin conditions,

                  blistering disorders, connective tissue diseases, and vasculitis
Side effects     ● Local side effects (from topical corticosteroids): skin atrophy (thinning),

                  telangiectasia, striae, may mask, cause or exacerbate skin infections,
                  acne, or perioral dermatitis, and allergic contact dermatitis.
                 ● Systemic side effects (from oral corticosteroids): Cushing’s syndrome,

                  immunosuppression, hypertension, diabetes, osteoporosis, cataract, and
                  steroid-induced psychosis

Oral aciclovir
Examples         ● Aciclovir

Indications      ● Viral infections due to herpes simplex and herpes zoster virus

Side effects     ● Gastrointestinal upsets, raised liver enzymes, reversible neurological

                   reactions, and haematological disorders

Oral antihistamines
Examples         ● Classified into nonsedative (e.g. cetirizine, loratadine) and sedative

                                                 66                 British Association of Dermatologists
Management – Oral antihistamines, Topical/Oral antibiotics, Topical antiseptics, Oral retinoids
                                                                                                                                               Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                                                                                     antihistamines (e.g. chlorpheniramine, hydroxyzine)
                                                                                                  Indications      ● Block histamine receptors producing an anti-pruritic effect

                                                                                                                   ● Useful for type-1 hypersensitivity reactions and eczema (especially

                                                                                                                     sedative antihistamines for children)
                                                                                                  Side effects     ● Sedative antihistamines can cause sedation and anticholinergic effects

                                                                                                                     (e.g. dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, and constipation)

                                                                                                  Topical/Oral antibiotics
                                                                                                  Examples         ● Topical antibiotics: fusidic acid, mupirocin (Bactroban), neomycin

                                                                                                                   ● Oral antibiotics: penicillins, cephalosporins, gentamicin, macrolides,

                                                                                                                     nitrofurantoin, quinolones, tetracyclines, vancomycin, metronidazole,
                                                                                                                     trimethoprim
                                                                                                  Indications      ● Useful for bacterial skin infections, and some are used for acne

                                                                                                  Side effects     ● Local side effects (from topical antibiotics): local skin irritation/allergy

                                                                                                                   ● Systemic side effects (from oral antibiotics): gastrointestinal upset, rashes,
                                                                                                                     anaphylaxis, vaginal candidiasis, antibiotic-associated infection such as
                                                                                                                     Clostridium difficile, and antibiotic resistance (rapidly appears to fusidic
                                                                                                                     acid)

                                                                                                  Topical antiseptics
                                                                                                  Examples         ● Chlorhexidine, cetrimide, povidone-iodine

                                                                                                  Indications      ● Treatment and prevention of skin infection

                                                                                                  Side effects     ● Local side effects: local skin irritation/allergy

                                                                                                  Oral retinoids
                                                                                                  Examples         ● Isotretinoin, Acitretin

                                                                                                  Indications      ● Acne, psoriasis, and disorders of keratinisation

                                                                                                  Side effects     ● Mucocutaneous reactions such as dry skin, dry lips and dry eyes,

                                                                                                                     disordered liver function, hypercholesterolaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia,
                                                                                                                     myalgia, arthralgia and depression
                                                                                                                   ● Teratogenicity: effective contraception must be practised one month

                                                                                                                     before, during and at least one month after isotretinoin, but for two years
                                                                                                                     after Acitretin (consult current BNF for further details)

                                                                                                                                                    67                   British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                            Practical Skills
                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Practical Skills

  •     There are four main aspects to focus on in clinical practice:
            i)   Patient education, particularly on the nature of disease, treatment and
                 ways to achieve full compliance and effectiveness, and prevention strategies
            ii) Effective written communication to general practitioner so that patients
                 care can be continued appropriately
            iii) Good prescribing skills
            iv) Good clinical examination and appropriate investigations to facilitate
                 accurate diagnosis

  •     This section highlights several general points on the important clinical skills in
        dermatology.

Learning objectives:

      1. Ability to perform the following tasks:
         - explain how to use an emollient or a topical corticosteroid
         - make a referral
         - write a discharge letter
         - write a prescription for emollient
         - take a skin swab
         - take a skin scrape
         - measure the ankle-brachial pressure index and interpret the result

      2. Describe the principles of prevention in:
         - pressure sores
         - sun damage and skin cancer

                                                68                  British Association of Dermatologists
Practical Skills – Patient education
                                                                                Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                       Patient education

                                       How to use emollients
                                                      ● Apply liberally and regularly

                                       How to use topical corticosteroids
                                                      ● Apply thinly and only for short-term use (often 1 or 2 weeks only)
                                                      ● Only use 1% hydrocortisone or equivalent strength on the face
                                                      ● Fingertip unit (advised on packaging) – strip of cream the length of a
                                                        fingertip

                                       Preventing pressure sores
                                                      ● Pressure sores are due to ischaemia resulting from localised damage to
                                                        the skin caused by sustained pressure, friction and moisture, particularly
                                                        over bony prominences.
                                                      ● Preventative measures involve frequent repositioning, nutritional support,
                                                        and use of pressure relieving devices e.g. special beds

                                       Preventing sun damage and skin cancer
                                                      ● Excessive exposure to UV radiation is the most significant
                                                        and preventable risk factor for the development of skin cancer (Table 14)
                                                      ● Skin types I and II are at higher risk of developing skin cancer with
                                                        excessive sun exposure than other skin types (Table 15)

                                       Table 14. SMART ways to avoid excessive sun exposure
                                       Spend time in the shade between 11am-3pm
                                       Make sure you never burn
                                       Aim to cover up with a t-shirt, wide-brimmed hat and sunglasses
                                       Remember to take extra care with children
                                       Then use Sun Protection Factor (SPF) 30+ sunscreen

                                                                                     69                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                                                                                            Practical Skills – Written communication and Prescribing skills
                                           Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

Table 15. Skin types
Skin types       Description
I                Always burns, never tans
II               Always burns, sometimes tans
III              Sometimes burns, always tans
IV               Never burns, always tans

Written communication

Writing a referral letter
        Important points to include:
                 ● Reason(s) for referral, current presentation, and impact of disease
                 ● Patient’s medical and social background
                 ● Current and previous treatment, length of treatment, and response to
                     treatment

Writing a discharge letter
        Important points to include:
                 ● Reason(s) for admission and current presentation
                 ● Hospital course
                 ● Investigation results
                 ● Diagnostic impression
                 ● Management plan (including treatment and follow-up appointment)
                 ● Content of patient education given

Prescribing skills

Writing a prescription
        General tips:
                 ● Include drug name, dose, frequency and an intended duration/review date
                 ● 30 grams of cream/ointment covers the whole adult body area
                 ● 1 fingertip unit covers the area of two palms and equals ½ gram

                                                70                  British Association of Dermatologists
Practical Skills – Clinical examination and investigations
                                                                                                       Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                                                             Prescribing emollients
                                                                     General tips
                                                                             ● Emollients come in 500 gram tubs
                                                                             ● In general, ointment-based emollients are useful for dry, scaling skin

                                                                               whereas creams and lotions are for red, inflamed and weeping lesions

                                                             Prescribing topical corticosteroids
                                                                     General tips
                                                                             ● Prescribe the weakest potency corticosteroid that is effective
                                                                             ● Use only for short term
                                                                             ● Need to specify the base i.e. cream, lotion or ointment

                                                             Clinical examination and investigations

                                                             Taking a skin swab
                                                                 •   Skin swabs can be taken from vesicles, pustules, erosions, ulcers and mucosal
                                                                     surfaces for microbial culture.
                                                                 •   Surface swabs are generally not encouraged.

                                                             Taking a skin scrape
                                                                 •   Skin scrapes are taken from scaly lesions by gentle use of a scalpel in suspected
                                                                     fungal infection (to show evidence of fungal hyphae and/or spores) and from
                                                                     burrows in scabies (see page 59).

                                                             Measuring ankle-brachial pressure index (ABPI)
                                                                 •   ABPI is used to identify the presence and severity of peripheral arterial insufficiency,
                                                                     which is important in the management of leg ulcers.
                                                                 •   Measure the cuff pressure of dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial artery using a Doppler
                                                                     and compare it to the pressure of brachial artery.
                                                                 •   The ABPI is measured by calculating the ratio of highest pressure obtained from the
                                                                     ankle to highest brachial pressure of the two arms, and is normally >0.8.
                                                                 •   Inappropriately high reading will be obtained in calcified vessels (often in diabetics).

                                                                                                            71                  British Association of Dermatologists
                                          Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

 Acknowledgements

We wish to acknowledge the following contributors:

   •   Dr Mark Goodfield, former President (2008-2010) of the British Association of
       Dermatologists, for writing the Foreword.
   •   Dr Niels K. Veien for allowing us to use his photographs. All illustrations in this
       handbook were obtained from "D@nderm" with his permission.
   •   Dr Susan Burge, retired Consultant Dermatologist, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS
       Trust, Professor Peter Friedmann, Emeritus Professor of Dermatology, Southampton
       General Hospital, and Professor Lesley Rhodes, Professor of Experimental
       Dermatology, University of Manchester for reviewing and contributing valuable
       suggestions.
   •   Mr Kian Tjon Tan, Specialty Registrar in Plastic Surgery, Royal Preston NHS
       Foundation Trust for contributing the chapter Background Knowledge.
   •   Dr Yi Ning Chiang, Specialty Doctor in Dermatology, Southport and Ormskirk Hospital
       NHS Trust for contributing the chapter Common Important Problems.

                                               72                  British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                         British Association of Dermatologists
Dermatology: Handbook for medical students & junior doctors

                         British Association of Dermatologists



################################################################################
# SECTION 4: HOME EMERGENCY GUIDE
# Source: Home_Emergency_Book.pdf.pdf
################################################################################

 HOME
EMERGENCY
 GUIDE
 HOME
EMERGENCY
 GUIDE

   DK Publishing
                                 LONDON, NEW YORK,
                            MUNICH, MELBOURNE, AND DELHI

                                  C ONTRIBUTORS
       Dr. Vivien Armstrong • Dr. Sue Davidson • Professor Ian Davis
             David Holloway • John McGowan • Tony Wilkins
    David R.Goldmannn MD FACP • Allen R.Walker MD • John Cunningham

                              Produced for Dorling Kindersley by
                                     C OOLING B ROWN
                                 9–11 High Street, Hampton,
                                    Middlesex TW12 2SA
                                Project Editor • Alison Bolus
                                Senior Designer • Tish Mills
                              Creative Director • Arthur Brown
                             Managing Editor • Amanda Lebentz

                                   D ORLING K INDERSLEY
                          Senior Managing Editor • Jemima Dunne
                             Managing Art Editor • Louise Dick
                           Senior Art Editor • Marianne Markham
                                DTP Designer • Julian Dams
                                        DK P UBLISHING
                                 Senior Editor • Jill Hamilton
                              Senior Art Editor • Susan St. Louis
                               Editorial Assistant • Kate Hamill

   Every effort has been made to ensure that the information contained in this book is complete and
   accurate. However, the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional advice or services to the
  individual reader. The ideas, procedures and suggestions contained in this book are general and not
intended as a substitute for consulting a relevant specialist in individual cases. The publisher would in
any event always advise the reader to consult his or her doctor or other health professional for specific
 information on personal health matters. The publisher cannot accept any legal responsibility for any
      loss or damage allegedly arising from any information or suggestion contained in this book.

                            First published in the United States in 2003 by
                                          DK Publishing, Inc.
                           375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014

                                00 01 02 03 04 05 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

                                 Copyright © 2002 Dorling Kindersley

  All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. No part of this
  publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
   means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written
                                  permission of the copyright owner.

               A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.

                                         ISBN 0-7894-9346-2

                          Color reproduction by GRB Editrice, Verona, Italy
                Printed and bound in Singapore by Star Standard Industries (Pte.) Ltd.

                               See our complete product line at
                                       www.dk.com
                             CONTENTS
                                                          1
                                      FIRST AID
Action in an emergency .................10
Resuscitation techniques ................12
Choking
(adults and children) ...........................22
Choking
(babies under 1) .................................24
Heart attack.....................................25
Asthma attack .................................26
Shock................................................27
Anaphylactic shock .........................28
Head injury ......................................29
Stroke...............................................30
Severe bleeding...............................31
Penetrating chest
wounds ............................................32
Cuts and scrapes..............................33              Nosebleed........................................39
Splinters ...........................................34       Emergency childbirth......................40
Eye wound.......................................35            Major seizures .................................42
Foreign object in the eye ...............36                   Febrile seizures................................43
Chemicals in the eye .......................37                Broken arm......................................44
Bleeding from the mouth ..............38                      Broken leg .......................................45
                                                              Spinal injuries ..................................46
                                                              Sprains and strains ..........................47
                                                              Severe burns ....................................48
                                                              Minor burns and scalds...................49
                                                              Sunburn ...........................................50
                                                              Heat exhaustion ..............................51
                                                              Heatstroke .......................................52
                                                              Fainting............................................53
                                                              Hypothermia ...................................54
                                                              Frostbite...........................................55
                                                              Swallowed poisons..........................56
                                                              Snake and spider bites....................57
                                                               Animal and tick bites.....................58
                                                                  Insect and
                                                                       scorpion stings ...................59
                                                                         First-aid equipment........60
                                                          2
                          FAMILY ILLNESS
How to use this section .................66                   Diarrhea (adults) ............................128
Assessing symptoms (adults) ...........68                     Diarrhea (children) .........................130
Assessing symptoms                                            Constipation .................................132
(children) ..........................................70       Chest pain.....................................134
Not feeling well .............................72              Palpitations...................................136
Fever (adults) ...................................74          Poor bladder control ....................137
Fever (children) ................................76           Painful urination ..........................138
Excessive sweating .........................78                Back pain ......................................140
Lumps and swellings ......................80                  Neck pain or stiffness....................142
Feeling faint /passing out ..............82                   Arm or hand pain ........................144
Headache ........................................84           Leg pain ........................................145
Vertigo ............................................86        Joint pain......................................146
Numbness and /or tingling ............88                      Swollen ankles..............................148
Facial pain.......................................90          Erectile dysfunction .....................150
Difficulty speaking .........................91               Testes and scrotum
Forgetfulness or confusion............92                      problems .......................................151
General skin problems....................94                   Penis problems .............................152
Rash with fever ..............................96              Breast problems ...........................154
Eye pain or irritation ......................98               Painful menstrual periods ...........156
Disturbed/impaired vision ...........100                      Heavy menstrual periods .............157
Earache .........................................102          Abnormal vaginal
                                                              bleeding........................................158
Sore throat ...................................103
                                                              Vaginal discharge.........................160
Hoarseness or
loss of voice ..................................104           Genital irritation
                                                              (women) .........................................161
Coughing (adults) ..........................106
                                                              Home medicine chest....................162
Coughing (children) .......................108
                                                              Caring for a sick person...............164
Shortness of breath
(adults) ...........................................110
Breathing problems
(children) ........................................112
Wheezing......................................114
Difficulty swallowing....................115
Vomiting (adults) ...........................116
Vomiting (children) ........................118
Abdominal pain
(adults) ...........................................120
Abdominal pain
(women) .........................................122
Abdominal pain
(children) ........................................124
Abdominal swelling .....................126
Anal and rectal problems ............127
                                                         3
HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES
                                                             Home safety..................................172
                                                             Yard safety ....................................178
                                                             Fires in the home .........................180
                                                             Gas leaks .......................................184
                                                             Plumbing
                                                             problems .......................................186
                                                             Central-heating
                                                             problems .......................................192
                                                             Air-conditioning
                                                             problems .......................................194
                                                             Electrical problems .......................196
                                                             Structural problems......................200
                                                             Insects and pests...........................208
                                                             Furniture and
                                                             furnishings ....................................210
                                                             Home security...............................212

                                                         4
              NATURAL DISASTERS
Planning for disaster....................220                 Tsunami.........................................242
Severe storm.................................226             Post-disaster survival....................244
Flood .............................................228
Extreme cold.................................230
Wildfire .........................................232
Hurricane ......................................234
Tornado.........................................236
Earthquake ...................................238
Volcanic eruption .........................240

Useful addresses
and online listings........................250
Index .............................................253
Acknowledgments .......................256
                                                      1
                                        FIRST
                                        AID
 Knowing what to do in a medical emergency, such as when someone
suffers a heart attack, a deep chest wound, or a snake bite, could save
  the victim’s life. This section tells you how to recognize important
  symptoms and give appropriate first-aid treatment in a wide range
of situations, with full details on resuscitating an unconscious person.

Action in an                            Chemicals                              Swallowed poisons........56
emergency .....................10       in the eye.......................37    Snake and
Resuscitation                           Bleeding from                          spider bites ....................57
techniques .....................12      the mouth .....................38      Animal and
Choking                                 Nosebleed......................39      tick bites ........................58
(adults and children) .........22       Emergency                              Insect and
Choking                                 childbirth .......................40   scorpion stings...............59
(babies under 1) ...............24      Major seizures ...............42       First-aid equipment ......60
Heart attack...................25       Febrile seizures..............43
Asthma attack ...............26         Broken arm....................44
Shock..............................27   Broken leg .....................45
Anaphylactic shock .......28            Spinal injuries ................46
Head injury ....................29      Sprains and strains ........47
Stroke.............................30   Severe burns ..................48
Severe bleeding ............31          Minor burns
                                        and scalds ......................49
Penetrating chest
wounds ..........................32     Sunburn .........................50
Cuts and scrapes............33          Heat exhaustion ............51
Splinters .........................34   Heatstroke .....................52
Eye wound.....................35        Fainting..........................53
Foreign object                          Hypothermia .................54
in the eye.......................36     Frostbite.........................55
10   FIRST AID

     Action in an emergency
     When faced with an emergency, try to remain calm and controlled so that you
     can act effectively. Before assessing the victim’s condition and carrying out
     the appropriate first aid, make sure that you are not putting yourself in danger.
     You will not be able to help anyone else if you become a victim yourself.
     If possible, have someone else dial 911 while you deal with the situation.

                                  ACTION PLAN

           Are you and/or                                           ACTION
                                        Is the victim
 START      the victim in
                                      talking to you?           CHECK THE
            any danger?                                         VICTIM’S INJURIES
                                                                (p.11) AND TREAT
                                                                AS APPROPRIATE.
                   Yes                      Yes                 CALL FOR HELP IF
                                                                NECESSARY.

                   No                        No

                                        Is the victim             Is the victim
                                         breathing?                conscious?
               ACTION
           ELIMINATE DANGER,                Yes                         Yes
           OR REMOVE THE
           VICTIM FROM
           DANGER, ONLY IF                   No
           YOU CAN DO SO
                                                                        No
           WITHOUT PUTTING
           YOURSELF AT RISK.
           DIAL 911.
                                        Dial 911 or
                                          call EMS.
                                        Give rescue
                                                                    ACTION
                                           breaths
                                      (pp.16–17). Are           CONTINUE RESCUE
                                      there any signs           BREATHS.
               ACTION                  of circulation?
           PLACE VICTIM IN THE
           RECOVERY POSITION
                                            Yes
           (pp.14–15). CHECK
           FOR SIGNS OF INJURY.
                                                                    ACTION
           DIAL 911 OR CALL
           EMS.
                                             No                 GIVE CPR (pp.18–20).
                                                        ACTION IN AN EMERGENCY          11

 ASSESSING A VICTIM’S INJURIES
                                             • Deal first with any life-threatening
                                               conditions the victim may have,
                                               such as unconsciousness (p.21),
                                               breathing difficulties (p.12), or
  Check the victim to                           heavy loss of blood (p.31).
  assess her injuries
                                                 • Check for and treat any
                                                   other injuries.

 CALLING AN AMBULANCE

1 Dial
  •
       911
   Check the victim’s breathing
                                           3 Give first aid
                                             • Give the appropriate first-aid to
   before calling for help.                    the victim.
  • possible, send someone else to
   If                                        • Stay with the victim until medical
   make the call and ask him or her            help arrives.
   to confirm that help is on the way.
                                             • Monitor the victim’s breathing
  • you are alone with a child who
   If                                          (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a child),
   is unconscious or an adult who              pulse (p.68 for an adult, p.70 for
   has drowned, choked, or been                a child), and consciousness (p.12)
   injured, give rescue breaths                until the ambulance arrives.
   (pp.16–17) and/or CPR (pp.18–20)
   for 1 minute before making the call.
  • you are alone with an adult who
   If
   is not breathing and you suspect a
   heart attack, dial 911 immediately.
                                             Monitor the victim’s
  • you have to leave a victim who
   If                                        condition while
   is breathing, place him in the            waiting for the
   recovery position (pp.14–15).             ambulance

2 Give
  •
       information
    Tell the ambulance dispatcher
    where you are, your telephone
    number, what has happened, the
    age, sex, condition, and injuries of
    the victim(s), and whether any
    hazards are still present, such as
    a fire or gasoline on the road.
12    FIRST AID

      Resuscitation techniques
      The techniques on the following pages, used in sequence, can help maintain a
      victim’s oxygen supply until help arrives. Upon finding an unconscious person,
      you need to open and, if necessary, clear the victim’s airway so that air can enter
      the lungs. If the victim is not breathing, give rescue breaths to maintain the oxygen
      supply, thereby sustaining the victim’s vital organs. If the victim also has no
      circulation, give cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) – rescue breaths with chest
      compressions – to ensure that air enters the body and is circulated by the blood.
      An unconscious victim who is breathing should be placed in the recovery position,
      a secure position that keeps the airway open and the head, neck, and back aligned.

      CHECKING FOR CONSCIOUSNESS (all ages)

     1 Seek reaction                                    2 Assess response
       •  Ask a simple question, or give                 • If the victim responds to
          a simple command, such as                       speech, assess whether he is
          “Open your eyes.”                               alert and aware of the situation
        • Shake an adult’s shoulders gently.              or confused and sleepy.
                                                         • he responds to touch, assess
                                                          If
                                                          whether he reacts readily to your
                                                          touch or is sluggish in response.

     !Important
        • Never shake a baby or child. Instead,
                                                         • there is no reaction at all, open
                                                          If
                                                          the victim’s airway (p.13).
          gently tap the shoulder or flick the
          sole of the foot.

                                                        3 Monitor
                                                          •
                                                                  victim
                                                            During first-aid treatment, you
                                   Shake an adult           will need to repeat steps 1–2
                                   victim gently by
                                   the shoulders to
                                                            every 10 minutes to check the
                                   see if he responds       victim’s level of consciousness.
                                                          • Note any changes in the victim’s
                                                            responses to speech or gentle
                                                            shaking (adult victims only),
                                                            and whether these indicate an
                                                            improvement or a deterioration
                                                            in his condition, then pass this
                                                            information on to the paramedics
                                                            when the ambulance arrives.
                                                          • If a conscious victim becomes
                                                            unconscious, open the airway
                                                            (p.13), check breathing (p.14),
                                                            and dial 911 or call EMS.
                                                        RESUSCITATION TECHNIQUES                13

 OPENING THE AIRWAY (adults and children)

         BEFORE YOU START
    Make sure that you have:
                                              2 Remove any
    • Checked for consciousness but             obstruction
      had no response (p.12).
                                                • Look inside the victim’s mouth.
                                                  Carefully pick out any obvious
                                                  obstruction with your fingers.

1 Tilt head back
  • Gently place one hand on the
    victim’s forehead.
                                              3 Lift
                                                •
                                                     chin
                                                  Place two fingers of the other hand
  • Tilt the head back by pressing                under the chin and lift it gently.
    down on the forehead.
                                                • Tilt the head to open the airway.
                                                  Check breathing (p.14).

!Important
  • If you suspect that there are head
                                                                          Using two
                                                                          fingers, gently
                                                                          lift up the chin

    or neck injuries, handle the head
    carefully. Tilt the head back slightly.
  • Do not sweep your fingers blindly
    around the mouth.

 OPENING THE AIRWAY (babies under 1)
         BEFORE YOU START
    Make sure that you have:
                                              3 Lift chin
    • Checked for consciousness but             • Place one finger of the other hand
      had no response (p.12).                     under the chin and lift it gently.
                                                • Tilt the head slightly. If you tilt it
                                                  too far, you may block the airway
                                                  again. Check breathing (p.14).
1 Tilt
  •
       head back
    Place one hand on the baby’s
    forehead, then tilt the head
    by pressing on the forehead.
                                                                                 Do not over-
                                                                                 extend the

2 Remove any                                                                     baby’s neck

  obstruction
  • Pick out any obvious obstruction
    in the mouth with your fingertips.
                                              ! Important
                                                • Always be very gentle with a baby’s head
                                                  when tilting it back.
14    FIRST AID

      CHECKING FOR BREATHING (all ages)
             BEFORE YOU START
         Make sure that you have carried out
                                                  2 Treat
                                                    •
                                                          victim
                                                         If breathing has stopped, begin
         the following steps:
         • Checked for consciousness but                 rescue breaths (pp.16–17).
           had no response (p.12).                     • If the victim is breathing but
         • Opened the victim’s airway (p.13).            unconscious, place him in the
                                                         recovery position (see below and
                                                         opposite), then check for injuries.

     1 Look for                                                                  Look down
                                                                                 across the chest

       movement                                                                  to see if it rises

       • Kneel beside the victim and put
         your cheek close to his mouth.
         Listen and feel for any signs of
         breathing, while looking along
         his chest for signs of movement.
       • Do this for up to 10 seconds.

      RECOVERY POSITION (adults and children)

             BEFORE YOU START
         Make sure that you have carried out
                                                 2 Prepare to
         the following steps:                         turn victim
         • Checked for consciousness but had          • Bring the arm farther from you
           no response (p.12).
                                                        across the victim’s chest, and
         • Opened the victim’s airway (p.13).           place the back of his hand under
         • Checked for breathing and found              his near cheek.
           definite signs (see above).
                                                      • Pull his far leg into a bent position;
                                                        keep his foot on the floor.
                                                      • Pull his knee toward you.
     1 Position arms
       and legs
       • Kneel next to the victim.
       • If the victim is wearing eyeglasses,
         remove them. Also remove any
         bulky objects from his pockets.
       • Position the arm closer to
         you so that it lies at a right
         angle to his body, with his
                                                                                  Use leg as
         elbow bent at a right angle            Keep palm                         lever to
         and the palm facing upward.            facing up                         turn body
                                                         R E S U S C I TAT I O N T E C H N I Q U E S   15

3 Turn
  •
       victim
    Continue to pull the upper leg
                                                4 Support
                                                  •
                                                          victim
                                                    Adjust the victim’s hand so that it
    so that the victim rolls onto                   supports his head. Bend the hip and
    his side. If necessary, support his             knee of his upper leg at right angles
    body with your knees so that he                 so that this leg supports his body.
    does not roll too far forward.                • Check that an ambulance is on
  • Leave the victim’s hand supporting              the way.
    his head, and tilt the head so that           • Check and record the victim’s
    the airway stays open.                          breathing (p.68 for an adult,
                                                    p.71 for a child), pulse (p.68
                                                       for an adult, p.70 for a child),
                                                        and consciousness (p.12)
                                                         until help arrives.

                                                ! Important
                                                  • If you suspect a spinal injury, do not move
                                                    the victim unless his breathing is impeded
                                     Keep           or he is in danger. Maintain his open airway.
                                     leg bent

 RECOVERY POSITION (babies under 1)
       BEFORE YOU START
   Make sure that you have carried out
   the following steps:
                                                ! Important
                                                  • If you suspect a spinal injury, do not move
   • Checked for consciousness but                  a baby unless the breathing is impeded or
     had no response (p.12).                        he is in danger.
   • Opened the baby’s airway (p.13).
   • Checked for breathing and found
     definite signs (see p.14).

                                                2 Monitor baby
                                                   • Monitor the baby’s breathing
1 Pick up baby
  • Hold the baby securely in
                                                     (p.71), pulse (p.70), and level
                                                          of consciousness (p.12)
                                                                    until help arrives.
    your arms so that his head
    is lower than his body.
  • Tilt the baby’s head back
    to keep the airway open
    and to allow any vomit to
    drain from his mouth.
                                                                                Keep the baby’s
  • Ensure that you keep the baby’s                                             head tilted
    head, neck, and back aligned                                                downward to
    and supported at all times.                                                 let fluid drain
16    FIRST AID

      GIVING RESCUE BREATHS (adults and children)
             BEFORE YOU START
         Make sure that you have carried out
                                                       3 Repeat
                                                         •
                                                                breathing
                                                          If there is no chest movement,
         the following steps:
         • Checked for consciousness but                  readjust his head and try again.
           had no response (p.12).                      • Repeat rescue breaths up to five
         • Opened the victim’s airway (p.13).             times or until you achieve two
         • Checked for breathing but found                effective breaths. Then check for
           no signs (p.14).                               signs of circulation (see step 4). OR
                                                        • If his chest fails to move even after
                                                          rescue breathing, check for signs
                                                          of circulation. If you know that
     1 Breathe into                                       the victim has choked and his
                                                          chest still does not move, do
       victim’s mouth                                     not check for circulation but
       • Check that the victim’s airway                   go straight to CPR (pp.18–20).
         is still open.
       • Pinch the victim’s nose closed with                                      Keep checking
         your thumb and index finger.                                             to see if his chest
       • Take a deep breath, then place                                           rises and falls
         your open mouth tightly around
         his so that you form a good seal.
       • Blow air into his mouth for
         about 2 seconds.
                                       Blow steadily
                                       into the
                                       victim’s
                                       mouth

                                                       4 Check for signs
                                                         of circulation
                                                         • Look for any signs that indicate
                                                           circulation – breathing, coughing,
                                                           and movement of limbs – for up
                                                           to 10 seconds.

     2 Watch
       •
             chest
         Lift your mouth away from the
                                                         • there are signs of circulation,
                                                           If
                                                           continue rescue breathing, giving
                                                           10 breaths per minute for adults
         victim’s mouth, keeping your                      and 20 for children. Recheck for
         hands in place to maintain his                    signs of circulation every minute.
         head position.                                  • If the victim starts breathing
                                                           again, place him in the recovery
       • Glance  at the victim’s chest; you
         should see his chest fall as the air              position (pp.14–15).
         leaves his lungs. This is called an             • If there are no signs of circulation,
         effective breath. Repeat the breath.              begin CPR (pp.18–20).
                                                             R E S U S C I TAT I O N T E C H N I Q U E S   17

! Important
  • If you have a face shield (p.60), use
    this when giving rescue breaths to
    prevent cross-infection.
                                                 Place the
  • If the victim has swallowed a corrosive      shield on the
    poison, use a face shield to protect         victim’s face,
    yourself from the effects of the chemical.   with the filter
                                                 over her mouth
  • Before giving the first breath, make
    sure that the victim’s head is tilted back
    and the airway is open.

 GIVING RESCUE BREATHS (babies under 1)

      BEFORE YOU START
  Make sure that you have carried out
                                                 2 Watch chest
  the following steps:                              • Glance at the baby’s chest; it should
  • Checked for consciousness but                     rise and fall. Repeat rescue breaths.
    had no response (p.12).                         • the chest does not move, readjust
                                                      If
  • Opened the baby’s airway (p.13).                  the airway and try again.
  • Checked for breathing but found                 • Try up to five times or until you
    no signs (p.14).                                  achieve two effective breaths. Check
                                                      for signs of circulation. OR
                                                    • If the chest still does not move,
                                                      check for signs of circulation.
1 Breathe into                                      • If you know the baby has choked
  baby’s mouth                                        and the chest still does not move,
                                                      do not check for circulation but
  • Make sure that the baby’s airway                  go straight to CPR (p.20).
    is still open.
  • Take a breath. Seal your lips

  •
    around both the mouth and nose.
    Attempt  to give about one breath
                                                 3 Check
                                                   •
                                                         circulation
                                                     Look for any signs that indicate
    per second.
                                                     circulation – breathing, coughing,
                                                     and movement of limbs – for up
                                                     to 10 seconds.
                                                    • there are signs of circulation,
                                                     If
                                                     continue rescue breathing (at a
                                                     rate of one breath per 3 seconds).
                                                     If there are no signs of circulation,
                                                     begin CPR (p.20).
                               pic

                                                       !Important
                                                            • When giving rescue breaths to a baby,
                                                              be careful not to blow too hard.
18    FIRST AID

      GIVING CPR (adults and children over 7)

              BEFORE YOU START
         Make sure that you have carried out
                                                  2 Position
                                                    •
                                                             hands
                                                     Lift away the fingers of your
         the following steps:
         • Checked for consciousness but had         first hand and lay this hand on top
           no response (p.12).                       of your other hand.
         • Opened the victim’s airway (p.13).      • Interlock your fingers, so that
         • Checked for breathing but found no        the fingers of your bottom hand
           signs (p.14).                             are not touching the chest.
         • Given two effective rescue breaths      • Kneel upright with your shoulders
           and checked for signs of circulation      directly above the victim and your
           but found none (p.16) OR
                                                     elbows locked straight.
         • Attempted two rescue breaths and
           checked for signs of circulation but
           found none (p.16).                                                  Raise fingers
                                                                               away from
                                                                               the chest

     1 Find compression
       point
       • Lay the victim on a firm surface.
       • Kneel beside the victim, level with
         his chest. Slide your fingers (using     3 Compress chest
         the hand farther from his head)           • Press downward, depressing the
         along the lowest rib to the point           breastbone by 11/2–2 inches (4–5 cm)
         where it meets the breastbone.              on an average adult, then release
       • Position  your middle and index             the pressure but do not remove
         fingers at this point.                      your hands from the chest.
       • Place the heel of your other hand         • Compress the chest in this way
         on the breastbone, just above your          15 times at a rate of about 100
         index finger.                               compressions per minute (roughly
         This is the                                 three every 2 seconds), maintaining
         area of the                                                an even rhythm.
         chest where
         you must
         apply the
         compressions.

                                                                           Keep your hands
                                                                           in position between
                                                                           compressions

         Place fingers
         where the victim’s
         lower rib and
         breastbone meet
                                                         R E S U S C I TAT I O N T E C H N I Q U E S   19

4 Give rescue breaths 5 Repeat CPR cycles
 • Give the victim two rescue                      • Continue giving cycles of 15 chest
   breaths (p.16).                                   compressions and two rescue
                              Pinch the nose
                                                     breaths until help arrives.
                              and tilt the chin
                              before placing
                                                   • the circulation returns or the
                                                     If
                              your mouth over
                                                     victim starts breathing at any time,
                              the victim’s           stop CPR and place him in the
                                                     recovery position (pp.14–15).
                                                   • Stay with the victim and monitor
                                                     his breathing (p.68), pulse (p.68),
                                                     and level of consciousness (p.12)
                                                     until help arrives.

 GIVING CPR (children 1–7)
       BEFORE YOU START
   Make sure that you have carried out
                                                  2 Give compressions
   the following steps:                            • Kneel upright with your shoulders
   • Checked for consciousness but had               directly above the child’s chest and
     no response (p.12).                             your elbow locked straight.
   • Opened the victim’s airway (p.13).            • Press downward, so that you
   • Checked for breathing but found no              are depressing the breastbone
     signs (p.14).                                   by one-third of the depth of the
   • Given two effective rescue breaths              chest, then release the pressure
     and checked for signs of circulation            without removing your hands.
     but found none (p.16) OR
                                                   • Compress the chest five times at a
   • Attempted two rescue breaths and                rate of about 100 compressions per
     checked for signs of circulation but
                                                     minute, keeping an even rhythm.
     found none (p.16).
                                                   • Give one rescue breath.

1 Find compression                                3 Repeat CPR cycles
  point                                            • Continue giving cycles of five chest
                                                     compressions to one rescue breath.
  • Lay the child on a firm surface.
                                                      • If the child’s circulation and/
  • Find the base of                                    or breathing return, place
    the breastbone                                      him or her in the recovery
    (see opposite),                                           position (pp.14–15).
    then position
    one hand on the                                                  • Stay with the child
    lower half of the                                                and monitor his or
    child’s breastbone.                                              her breathing (p.71),
                                                                     pulse (p.70), and
   Position one                                                    level of consciousness
   hand ready                                                   (p.12) until help arrives.
   for compressions
20    FIRST AID

      GIVING CPR (babies under 1)
              BEFORE YOU START
         Make sure that you have carried out
                                                  2 Compress chest
         the following steps:                      • Press downward, so that you
                                                     depress the breastbone by one-
         • Checked for consciousness but             third of the depth of the chest,
           had no response (p.12).
                                                     then release the pressure without
         • Opened the baby’s airway (p.13).          moving your hands.
         • Checked for breathing but found no
           signs (p.14).                           • Compress the chest five times at a
         • Given two effective rescue breaths        rate of about 100 compressions per
           and checked for signs of circulation      minute, keeping an even rhythm.
           but found none (p.17). OR
                                                   • Give one effective rescue breath.
         • Attempted two rescue breaths and
           checked for signs of circulation but
           found none (p.17).                                                     Seal your
                                                                                  mouth over
                                                                                  the baby’s
                                                                                  nose and
                                                                                  mouth

     1 Find compression
       point
       • Lay the baby on a firm surface.
       • Position the tips of two fingers of
         one hand on the baby’s breastbone,
         a finger’s width below the nipples.
         This is the point where you must
         apply the compressions.                  3 Repeat CPR cycles
                                                   • Continue giving cycles of five
                                                     chest compressions and one
                                                     rescue breath.
                                                   • If the baby’s circulation and/or
                                                     breathing return, stop CPR
                                                     and hold him or her in the
                                                     recovery position (p.15).
                                                   • Stay with the baby and monitor
                                                     his or her breathing (p.71), pulse
                                                     (p.70), and level of consciousness
                                                     (p.12) until help arrives.
                                                                         Listen for
       Place two fingers                                                 breathing
       on the breastbone
       just below nipple line

     !Important
                                                                              Look for chest
                                                                              movements

       • When giving rescue breaths to a baby,
         be careful not to blow too hard.
                                 RESUSCITATION TECHNIQUES • UNCONSCIOUSNESS                      21

Unconsciousness
An interruption in the normal activity of the brain
                                                                SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
results in unconsciousness. This potentially life-
threatening condition requires immediate medical                • No response to loud
                                                                  noise or gentle shaking
help. The aims of first-aid treatment are to check the
                                                                • Closed eyes
victim’s level of consciousness, open the airway and            • No movement or sound
check breathing, then, if the victim is breathing, to
put him or her in a stable position until help arrives.

TREATING UNCONSCIOUSNESS (all ages)

1 Check                                     3 Treat injuries
  consciousness                                • Examine the victim gently for any
                                                 serious injuries.
  • Check the victim for signs                 • Control any bleeding (p.31).
    of consciousness (p.12).
                                                 Check for and support suspected
  • Open   the victim’s airway (p.13)            broken arms or legs (pp.44–45).
    and check her breathing (p.14).
  • If the victim is not breathing, begin
    rescue breaths (p.16 for adults and
    children, p.17 for babies).             4 Monitor victim
  • the victim is breathing, place her
    If                                         • Stay with the victim until medical
    in the recovery position (pp.14–15           help arrives.
    for adults and children, p.15 for          • Monitor   her breathing regularly
    babies) and treat any injuries               (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a
    (see step 3).                                child or baby) and pulse (p.68
                                                 for an adult, p.70 for a child
                                                 or baby) every 10 minutes.
                                               • Check for any changes in the
                                                 victim’s level of consciousness by
                                                 asking simple questions or shaking
                                 Keep            her gently every 5–10 minutes.
                                 leg bent

2 Summon help                               !Important
                                              • Do not move the victim unnecessarily in case
 • Dial 911 or call EMS.                        there is spinal injury.
 • Look for clues to the cause of the         • If you need to leave the victim to get help,
   condition, such as needle marks,             place her in the recovery position (pp.14–15
   medical warning bracelets, or                for adults and children, p.15 for babies).
   identification cards.
                                              • Do not shake a baby or child.
 • Ask bystanders for any information         • Be prepared to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
   they may have that you can give
   to the emergency services.                 • Do not give an unconscious victim anything
                                                to eat or drink.
22   FIRST AID

     Choking (adults and children)
     An obstruction of the airway, usually caused by food
                                                                   SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
     or a foreign object, can result in choking. The aim of
     first-aid treatment for choking is to dislodge the object    • Coughing, difficulty in
                                                                     breathing and talking
     as quickly as possible. This involves encouraging the        • Signs of distress, including
     victim to cough, then, if necessary, using thrusts. If          holding the throat

     the obstruction is not removed, the victim will stop         • Red face and neck, later
                                                                     turning gray-blue
     breathing and lose consciousness.

     TREATING CHOKING
     (adults and children over 7)

     1 Encourage                                    2Give abdominal
       coughing                                      thrusts
       • Ask the victim to cough. This may           • If the victim is becoming weak, or
         dislodge whatever is blocking the             stops breathing or coughing, carry
         victim’s windpipe.                            out abdominal thrusts. Stand
       • Check a child’s mouth to see if               behind the victim and put both
         anything has been dislodged.                  arms around the upper part of the
                                                       abdomen. Make sure he is
                                                       bending forward.
                                                     • Clench   your fist and
                                                       place it (thumb inward)
                                                       between the navel and
                                                       the bottom of the
                                                       breastbone. Grasp
         Encourage victim                              your fist with your
         to cough                                      other hand. Pull
                                                       sharply inward
                                                       and upward up to

     !Important
       • If the victim becomes unconscious,
                                                       five times.

         open the airway, check breathing, and
         be prepared to begin resuscitation
                                                    3 Check
                                                      •
                                                            mouth
                                                       Check his mouth. If the obstruction
         (pp.12–20).                                   is still not cleared, repeat steps 2
       • If the victim is pregnant or obese, or        and 3 up to three times, checking
         you cannot reach around the victim’s          his mouth after each step.
         abdomen, give chest thrusts instead of
         abdominal thrusts. Position your fist in
                                                     • If the obstruction still has not
                                                       cleared, Dial 911 or call EMS.
         the middle of the victim’s chest, grab        Continue until help arrives or the
         your fist with the other hand, and pull       victim becomes unconscious.
         sharply inward up to five times.
                                             CHOKING (ADULTS AND CHILDREN)           23

 TREATING CHOKING (children 1–7)

1 Encourage                                 3 Give abdominal
 coughing                                    thrusts
 • If the child is still able to breathe,    • If the child shows signs of
     encourage him to cough. This may          becoming weak, or stops
     help dislodge the obstruction, and        breathing or coughing, carry
     should always be tried before other       out abdominal thrusts.
              method, such as abdominal      • Put your arms around the child’s
                 thrusts, are used.            upper abdomen. Make sure
                                               that he is bending well forward.
                                             • Place your fist between the navel
                                               and the bottom of the breastbone,
                                               and grasp it with your other hand.
                                               Pull sharply
 Encourage                                     inward and
 child to                                      upward up
 cough
                                               to five times.
                                               Stop if the
                                               obstruction
                                               clears.

2 Check
  •
        mouth
     Check the child’s mouth carefully
                                                 Give five
                                                 abdominal
                                                 thrusts
     to see if anything has been
     dislodged. Encourage him to spit
     it out, then make sure that the
     obstruction has been cleared.          4 Check mouth
                                             • Check the victim’s mouth again to

!   Important
    • Do not sweep your finger around the
                                               see if anything has been dislodged,
                                               and remove the object carefully.
                                             • If the obstruction is still not
      child’s mouth since you might push       cleared, repeat steps 3 and 4 up to
      an object farther down the throat.       three times.
    • If the child becomes unconscious,      • If the obstruction still has not
      open the airway, check breathing,        cleared, dial 911 or call EMS.
      and be prepared to begin               • Continue giving abdominal thrusts
      resuscitation (pp.12–20).                until help arrives or the child
                                               becomes unconscious.
24    FIRST AID

      Choking (babies under 1)
      Babies under 1 can easily choke on small objects.
                                                                      SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      A choking baby may squeak, turn red then blue in
      the face, or appear to cry without making a noise.              • High-pitched squeak-like
                                                                        sounds, or no noise at all
      The aim of first-aid treatment is to dislodge the               • Difficulty in breathing
      object as quickly as possible, using chest thrusts.             • Red face and neck,
                                                                        turning gray-blue
      If the obstruction is not removed, the baby will
      stop breathing and lose consciousness.

      TREATING CHOKING

     1 Give back slaps                              2 Give chest thrusts
       • Position the baby face down                  • If the baby is still
         along your arm, with your                      choking, lay her face
         hand supporting her head.                      upwards and place
       • Slap  her back sharply                         two fingers on her
         up to five times.                              breastbone, just
                                                        below nipple level.
       • Turn her over
         and look in her                              • Push  sharply
         mouth to see if                                into her chest
         anything has                                   with your fingers
         been dislodged.                                up to five times.
       • If it has, pick it                           • Check  her mouth
         out carefully.                                 again and remove
                                                        anything that you
                                                        can see.

          Give five                                            Give five sharp
          back slaps                                           chest thrusts

                                                    3 Repeat
                                                      •
                                                             treatment
                                                        If the obstruction still has
                                                        not been dislodged, repeat the
                                                        sequence of back slaps and chest
                                                        thrusts three more times.

     ! Important
       • Do not blindly sweep your finger
                                                      • If the obstruction has not been
                                                        cleared after all efforts have
                                                        been made, call an ambulance.
         around the mouth.
                                                      • Take the baby with you when
       • If the baby becomes unconscious, open          you go to call the ambulance.
         the airway, check breathing, and prepare
         to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).           • Repeat the treatment sequence
                                                        while you are waiting for the
       • Do not attempt to use abdominal                ambulance to arrive.
         thrusts on a baby.
                                     CHOKING (BABIES UNDER 1) • HEART ATTACK                  25

 Heart attack
 A heart attack is usually caused by a blockage of
                                                             SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 the blood supply to the heart. The aims of first-aid
 treatment for a heart attack are to make the victim         • Sharp chest pain often
                                                                extending down left arm
 comfortable and to arrange for prompt transport to          • Nausea and vomiting
 the hospital. The chances of surviving a heart attack       • Feeling faint and breathless
 have improved significantly in recent years, but it         • Gray skin and blueish lips
 is still vital that the victim be treated by medical        • Pulse that quickens and
                                                                then weakens
 professionals as soon as possible.

 TREATING A HEART ATTACK

1 Make victim                              2 Summon help
  comfortable                                • Dial 911 or call EMS. Tell the
                                               dispatcher that you are with
  • Raise the victim’s shoulders so that       someone who is probably
    he is half-sitting and support him         having a heart attack.
    with cushions or pillows.
                                             • Call the victim’s doctor, if you are
  • Bend  his knees and support them           requested to do so.
    with more pillows.
  • Reassure him and keep him as
    calm as possible.
                                           3 Help with
                                             medication
                                             • If the victim has medication for
                                               angina, help her take it.
  Support victim’s
  back with cushions
  or pillows

                                           4 Monitor condition
                                             • Keep the victim calm and rested.
                                             • Check and record the victim’s
                                               breathing (p.68), pulse (p.68), and
                                               level of consciousness (p.12) until
                                               medical help arrives.

                                           !Important
                                             • Do not allow the victim to eat or drink.
                                               • If the victim falls unconscious, open his
                                                 airway, check breathing, and be prepared
    Prop up legs
                                                 to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
    with cushions
    or pillows
26    FIRST AID

      Asthma attack
      During an asthma attack, muscle contractions cause
                                                                   SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      the airways of the lungs to narrow, leading to
      swelling and inflammation of the airways’ linings.           • Breathing becomes difficult
      This results in difficulty breathing, which can be           • Frequent dry, wheezy cough
                                                                   • Difficulty talking
      life-threatening. The aims of first-aid treatment for an     • Gray-blue tinge to skin
      asthma attack are to help the victim to breathe and
      to seek medical help if symptoms do not improve.

      TREATING AN ASTHMA ATTACK

     1 Calm victim                                 2 Provide
       •  Sit the victim down in a
          comfortable position. Leaning
                                                     medication
                             forwards is             • Give the victim her reliever inhaler,
                              usually best.            and ask her to take a dose.
                              • Reassure and         • the victim is a child, he or
                                                       If
                                calm her.              she may need to have a spacer
                                                       attached to the inhaler (p.167).
                              • Tell her
                                to breathe           • The  effect of the inhaler should
                                slowly and             be obvious within minutes if it
                                deeply.                is a mild asthma attack.

                                                   3 Repeat
                                                     •
                                                            the dose
                                                       If the inhaler has eased the
                                                       symptoms, ask the victim to
                                                       repeat the dose.

     ! Important
        • Do not use a preventive inhaler
                                                     • Encourage her to continue
                                                       breathing slowly and deeply.
                                                                   • Tell her to inform her
          during an attack.                                          doctor if the attack
        • If the victim becomes unconscious,                         was unusually severe.
          open her airway, check breathing,
          and be prepared to begin                                              If inhaler is
          resuscitation (pp.12–20).                                             effective, ask
                                                                                victim to repeat
       Call an ambulance if                                                     the dose

       • This is the first attack and the victim
          does not have an inhaler.
        • The asthma does not improve after
          two doses of reliever inhaler.
        • The victim is exhausted and is finding
          breathing increasingly difficult.
                                                                    ASTHMA ATTACK • SHOCK               27

 Shock
 Any severe injury or illness, such as severe bleeding
                                                                        SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 or burns, that dramatically reduces the flow of blood
 around the body can cause shock. If shock is not                       • Fast, then weakening, pulse
 treated rapidly, vital organs may fail. The aims of                    • Gray-blue tinge to lips
                                                                          and skin
 first-aid treatment are to treat any obvious cause                     • Sweating and cold,
                                                                          clammy skin
 of shock, to improve the blood supply to the vital
                                                                        • Dizziness and weakness
 organs, and then to get the victim to the hospital.

 TREATING SHOCK

1 Treat cause                                     3 Summon help
  of shock                                             • Dial 911 or call EMS.
  • If the cause of shock is obvious,
    for example severe bleeding
    (see p.31), treat it accordingly.             4 Monitor victim
                                                       • Monitor the victim’s breathing
                                                         (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a
2 Make victim                                            child or baby), pulse (p.68 for an
                                                         adult, p.70 for a child or baby),
  comfortable                                            and level of consciousness (p.12)
  • If the victim is breathing normally,                 every 10 minutes until help arrives.
    lay him on the floor or another
    firm surface, on top of a blanket
    if the surface is cold.
  • his legs are not injured, raise
    If
                                                   !Important
                                                       • Stay with the victim at all times, except if
    and support them so that they are                    you need to dial 911 or call EMS.
    above the level of his heart.
                                                       • Keep the victim still.
  • Keep   the victim still.
                                                       • Do not let the victim eat, drink, or smoke.
  • Loosen any restrictive clothing                    • If the victim becomes unconscious, open his
    around his neck, chest, and waist.                   airway, check breathing, and be prepared to
  • If he is cold, cover him with a                      begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
    blanket or clothing.
                                          Raise legs
                    Keep his head lower
     Insulate       than his chest
     from cold
28   FIRST AID

     Anaphylactic shock
     People who have an extreme sensitivity to a specific
                                                                 SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
     substance can suffer a rare and severe type of
     allergic reaction known as anaphylactic shock.              • Itchy red skin rash
     The reaction spreads through the body, causing a            • Swollen face, lips, and
                                                                    tongue
     sudden drop in blood pressure and narrowing of              • Anxiety
     the airways, and can be fatal. The aims of first-aid        • Difficulty breathing,
                                                                    wheezing
     treatment are to help the victim inject epinephrine
     (Epipen) and to summon help.

     TREATING ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK

     1 Summon
       •
              help
        Dial 911 or call EMS, or ask
                                             3 Look
                                               •
                                                    for Epipen
                                                   If the victim has an Epipen, get it
        someone else to do so.                     for him so that he can administer it.
      • Tell the dispatcher if you know                         • Epinephrine is usually
        what has caused the reaction.                              administered
                                                                     into the outer
                                                                       thigh, through
     2 Make victim                                                      any clothing.

      comfortable
      • If the victim is conscious,                                            Place Epipen
        help him into a sitting position                                       against thigh and
        to ease difficulty breathing.                                          depress needle

        Sitting up should
        aid victim’s
        breathing
                                             4 Monitor victim
                                                 • Monitor victim’s breathing (p.68
                                                   for an adult, p.71 for a child or
                                                   baby), pulse (p.68 for an adult,
                                                   p.70 for a child or baby), and level
                                                   of consciousness (p.12) every
                                                   10 minutes until help arrives.

                                             ! Important
                                                 • Stay with the victim at all times, except if you
                                                   have to leave him to dial 911 or call EMS.
                                                    • If the victim becomes unconscious, open
                                                       his airway, check his breathing, and be
                                                       prepared to begin resuscitation
                                                       (pp.12–20).
                                             ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK • HEAD INJURY                          29

 Head injury
 Although a head injury sometimes leaves no visible
                                                                 SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 wound, there may be obvious bruising or bleeding at
 the site. The victim may have a headache. The aims              • Bleeding or bruising at the
                                                                   site of the wound
 of first-aid treatment are to control bleeding, dress the       • Depression in the skull
 wound, and seek medical help. Even apparently minor             • Dizziness or nausea
                                                                 • Headache and memory loss
 head injuries should always be seen by a doctor.

 TREATING A HEAD INJURY

1 Treat visible                             3 Monitor victim
   wounds                                     •   Monitor the victim’s breathing
                                                  (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a child
   • If there is a scalp wound, replace           or baby), pulse (p.68 for an adult,
     any skin flaps.                                           p.70 for a child or
   • Press a clean pad firmly over the                          baby), and level of
     wound to control the blood flow.                            consciousness (p.12)
   • Maintain the pressure for at least                          every 10 minutes
     10 minutes until the blood flow                             until help arrives.
     has been controlled.
                                                                Use a pillow
   • Secure a bandage around the                                to support
     victim’s head to hold the                                  her head and
                                                                shoulders
     pad in position.
                    Lie victim down in
                    case of shock

2 Assess victim
  •  Check that the victim is fully
     conscious by asking simple,
     direct questions in a clear voice.
                                            !Important
                                                • Use disposable gloves and/or wash your
                                                  hands well when dealing with body fluids.
   • If she answers your questions,
     lay her down in a comfortable              • If the victim becomes unconscious, open her
     position, then arrange for                   airway, check her breathing, and be prepared
     transport to the hospital.                   to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
   • the victim does not respond, ask
     If                                         Dial 911 or call EMS if
     someone to dial 911 or call EMS.
                                                • The victim is unconscious, appears confused,
   • you need to leave an unconscious
     If                                           or her condition is deteriorating.
     victim, place her in the recovery
     position first (pp.14–15) unless           • There is a depression or soft patch in her
     you suspect a spinal injury.                 skull, or blood or watery fluid is leaking from
                                                  her ears or nose; these indicate a skull fracture.
30    FIRST AID

      Stroke
      An interruption of the blood supply to the brain,
                                                                    SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      caused by a blood clot or a ruptured artery in the
      brain, is known as a stroke. The effect of a stroke           • Acute headache
      depends on which part, and how much, of the                   • Confusion, which could be
                                                                        mistaken for drunkenness
      brain is affected. Although a major stroke can be             • Weakness or paralysis,
                                                                        possibly on just one side
      fatal, a minor stroke is not life-threatening, and                of the body, manifested in
      a full recovery is possible. Whether the victim is                slurred speech, drooping
                                                                        mouth, and a loss of limb,
      conscious or unconscious, it is important that he or              bladder, or bowel control
      she is taken to hospital as soon as possible in order         •   Possible unconsciousness
      to minimize any brain damage caused by the stroke.

      TREATING A STROKE

     1 Lay
       •
           victim down
         Make the victim comfortable by
                                                2 Summon
                                                  •
                                                         help
                                                    Ask someone to dial 911 or call
         laying her down and supporting             EMS immediately.
         her head and shoulders slightly with
         cushions or rolled-up blankets.
       • Tilt her face to one side to allow
         any fluid to drain out of her
                                                3 Monitor
                                                  •
                                                          victim
                                                    Check and record the victim’s
         mouth, and wipe her face with a
                                                    breathing (p.68), pulse (p.68),
         washcloth. Alternatively, place
                                                    and level of consciousness (p.12)
         something absorbent on her
         shoulder to soak up the fluid.             every 10 minutes until help arrives.

       • Loosen restrictive clothing around
         her neck and chest.

                                                ! Important
                                                  • Do not allow the victim to have anything to
                                                    eat or drink.
                                                  • If the victim is or falls unconscious, open her
                                                    airway, check breathing, and be prepared to
                                                    begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).

                                                                             Use washcloth
                                                                             to absorb any
                                                                             fluid
                                                         STROKE • SEVERE BLEEDING                  31

Severe bleeding
A heavy loss of blood is often distressing and can be life-threatening. The aims
of first-aid treatment are to stop the bleeding, dress the wound as quickly as
possible, and respond to any condition, such as shock or unconsciousness, that
may result from heavy loss of blood or from the wound itself.

TREATING SEVERE BLEEDING

1 Control blood flow 3 Secure dressing
  •                    •
   If necessary, remove or cut away              Bandage the wound dressing
   any clothing to expose the wound.             firmly but not too tightly (p.61,
 • Cover the injury with a sterile               checking circulation).
   wound dressing, a clean pad if              • If blood seeps through the dressing,
   you have one, or with your hand.              cover it with another one. If
 • Press the wound firmly for 10                 bleeding continues, remove both
   minutes, or longer if necessary,              dressings and apply a fresh one.
   until the bleeding stops. Use
   disposable gloves if available.
 • If possible, raise injured part above
   the victim’s heart level. If part may
                                             4 Summon help
   be fractured, handle it with care.          • Ask someone to dial 911, or
                                                 do so yourself.
             Keep part raised
             above heart level
                  Keep firm, even pressure
                  on the wound until
                                             5 Monitor victim
                  bleeding stops               • Watch for signs of shock (p.27).
                                               • Monitor the victim’s breathing
                                                 (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a child
                                                 or baby), pulse (p.68 for an adult,
                                                 p.70 for a child or baby), and level
                                                 of consciousness (p.12) every
                                                 10 minutes until help arrives.

                                             ! Important
                                               • Use disposable gloves and/or wash your
                                                 hands well when dealing with body fluids.
                                               • Do not apply a tourniquet.
2Lay
 •
     victim down
   If the bleeding does not stop, lay
                                               • If there is an object in a wound, place padding
                                                 on either side of the object so that the
   the victim on a firm surface,                 dressing will rest on the pads, not the object.
   keeping the injured part raised.            • If the victim becomes unconscious, open her
                                                 airway, check her breathing, and be prepared
 • Loosen   any restrictive clothing.
                                                 to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
32    FIRST AID

      Penetrating chest wounds
      A deep wound to the chest can cause direct or
                                                                   SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      indirect damage to the lungs, which may lead to a
      collapsed lung, and damage to the heart. The aims             • Difficult, painful breathing
      of first-aid treatment for a penetrating chest wound          • Acute distress
                                                                    • Presence of frothy blood
      are to stop the bleeding, to help prevent the victim            at mouth
      from going into shock, and to get the victim to the           • Possible signs of shock
      hospital for treatment as quickly as possible.

      TREATING PENETRATING CHEST WOUNDS

     1 Control blood flow 3 Make victim
       • Expose the wound and press the
         palm of your hand against it, or
                                                  comfortable
         get the victim to do it himself.         • Encourage the victim to lean
                                                    toward the side of the wound.
       • Support  the victim in a semi-
         upright or half-sitting position.        • Try to make him as comfortable
                                                    as possible, using additional
                                                    cushions or pillows to support

     2 Dress wound                                  him as necessary.
                                                  • Loosen any restrictive clothing
       • Cover the wound with a sterile             around his waist.
         dressing or clean pad.
       • Cover the dressing with a piece
         of aluminum foil, plastic wrap, or
                                              4 Summon
                                                •
                                                       help
                                                    Dial 911 or call EMS. Tell the
         a plastic bag to prevent air from
                                                    dispatcher where the injury is and
         entering the chest cavity.
                                                    describe the extent of the bleeding.
       • Secure the dressing with a bandage       • Watch  carefully for any signs of
         or strips of adhesive or micro-
                                                    shock developing (p.27).
         porous tape. Apply the tape to
         three sides of the dressing only.

                                              ! Important
                                                  • Use disposable gloves and/or wash your
                                                    hands well when dealing with body fluids.
                                                  • If the victim is or falls unconscious, open his
                                                    airway, check his breathing, and be prepared
                                                    to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
                                                  • If you need to put him in the recovery position
                                                    (pp.14–15), lay him on his injured side.

       Cover pad with
       plastic wrap and
       secure with tape
                           PENETRATING CHEST WOUNDS • CUTS AND SCRAPES                       33

Cuts and scrapes
Small wounds, such as cuts and scrapes, rarely bleed
                                                                 SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
for long and require little in the way of first-aid
treatment. What is important, however, is to clean the           • Oozing blood
wound and apply a sterile wound dressing as quickly              • Localized pain
                                                                 • Scraped area containing
as possible in order to minimize the risk of infection.            dirt and dust particles
Check, too, that the victim’s tetanus immunization is
up to date, and arrange a booster dose if necessary.

TREATING CUTS AND SCRAPES

1 Clean wound                             2 Dress
                                            •
                                                  wound
                                                For smaller cuts and scrapes,
  • Sit the victim down and reassure
    her. Even a minor fall can leave a          cover the injured area with an
    victim feeling shaky.                       adhesive bandage.
  • Rinse  dirt from the cut or scrape        • For larger injuries, place a sterile
    under cold running water.                   wound dressing over the injury
                                                and bandage it in place (p.61).
  • Gently clean the entire wound area
    with sterile gauze swabs. Use a           • Rest the injured limb, preferably
    new swab for each stroke and work           in a raised position.
    from the wound outward.                   Protect scrape
                                              with an adhesive
  • Lift any loose material, such as
                                              bandage
    glass, gravel, or metal with the
    corner of a gauze swab.
  • Carefully  pat the area dry with
    a clean gauze swab.
       Wash
       scrape

                                          ! Important
                                             • Use disposable gloves and/or wash your
                                                hands well when dealing with body fluids.
  Sit victim                                 • Do not touch the cut or scrape with your
  down                                          fingers to avoid infecting the wound.
                                             • Avoid using cotton or any other dry fluffy
                                                material to clean a cut or scrape – such
                                                material is likely to stick to the wound.
34    FIRST AID

      Splinters
      It is very common to find small splinters of wood
                                                                    SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      embedded in the skin of hands, knees, and feet,
      especially those of children. It is usually possible to       • Fine piece of wood sticking
                                                                          out of skin
      remove splinters by hand or using tweezers, having            • Dark line under skin surface
      made sure that the wound has first been cleaned and           • Blood oozing from puncture
                                                                          in skin
      the tweezers sterilized. If splinters remain embedded
      or lie over a joint, seek medical help.

      TREATING SPLINTERS

     1 Sterilize
       •
                 tweezers 3 Clean wound
          Using soap and warm water, clean
                            •                         Squeeze the area around the
          the affected area thoroughly.               wound to make it bleed. This helps
        • Sterilize a pair of tweezers by             to flush out any remaining dirt.
          heating them in a flame.                  • Clean the affected area and cover
                                                      it with an adhesive bandage.
                                                    • Check that the victim’s tetanus
                                                      immunization is up to date.

                   Sterilize
                   tweezers
                   in a flame
                                                                                        Squeeze area
                                                                                        to encourage

     2 Pull
       •
            out splinter
          Grip the splinter with the
                                                                                        a little bleeding

          tweezers, then pull it out in a
          straight line in the opposite
                                               4 Dress embedded
          direction to which it entered.            splinter
        • Try  not to break the splinter.           • If the splinter breaks, or will not
                                                      come out, place pads on either side,
       Grasp splinter                                 and a bandage over it, taking care
       and pull it                                    not to press down on the splinter.
       straight out
                                                    • Seek medical help.

                                                ! Important
                                                    • Do not attempt to use a needle to lever
                                                      out the splinter.
                                                    • Use disposable gloves and/or wash your
                                                      hands well when dealing with body fluids.
                                                                   SPLINTERS • EYE WOUND                35

 Eye wound
 Any wound to the eye is potentially serious. Blows
                                                                    SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 to the eye can cause bruising or cuts, and sharp
 fragments of materials, such as glass, can become                  • Sharp pain in injured eye
 embedded in the eye’s surface. Even a superficial                  • Visible wound or
                                                                      bloodshot eye
 scrape can result in scarring and vision deterioration.            • Partial or total loss of vision
 The aims of first-aid treatment for an eye wound are               • Blood or clear fluid leaking
                                                                      from injured eye
 to prevent any further damage, to dress the wound,
 and to get the victim to the hospital.

 TREATING AN EYE WOUND

1 Keep
  •
       victim still
     Lay the victim on a firm surface,
                                                    2 Dress
                                                      •
                                                            wound
                                                        Hold a sterile wound dressing or
     placing a blanket underneath him                   clean pad over the injured eye, or
     if it is cold.                                     ask the victim to do it, and ask
   • Kneel down and support his head                    him to keep his uninjured eye still.
                     on your knees,                   • Keep his head steady.
                       holding it as still
                        as possible.
                        • Tell him to
                          keep both
                          his eyes shut              Keep
                          and still.                 injured eye
                                                     covered

                              Tell victim to keep
                              both eyes still

                                                    3 Summon
                                                      •
                                                             help
                                                        Ask someone to dial 911 or call
   Support his
   head                                                 EMS. If you call yourself, first
                                                        place some cushions under the
                                                        victim’s head for support.

! Important
  • Do not touch the affected eye or
                                                      • Alternatively, if you can keep the
                                                        victim still and laying down, take
                                                        him to the hospital yourself.
    allow the victim to touch it.
36    FIRST AID

      Foreign object in the eye
      Eyelashes, bits of dust, and dislodged contact lenses
                                                                    SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      are common eye irritants. They usually float on the
      white of the eye, and can be easily removed. Anything         • Eye pain or discomfort
      that rests on the coloured part of the eye or is stuck        • Blurred vision
                                                                    • Red or watering eye
      on or embedded in the eye’s surface, however, will
      demand hospital attention. Your aims are to prevent
      injury to the eye and seek hospital care, if necessary.

      TREATING A FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE EYE

     1 Examine
       •
               eye
         Sit the victim down so that she
                                                 3 Lift
                                                   •
                                                        off object
                                                      If flushing does not work, use
         is facing the light.                         the corner of a clean, dampened
       • Using two fingers, gently separate           handkerchief or tissue to lift the
         the upper and lower eyelids so that          foreign object off the eye.
         you can examine the eye.                   • Do not use any pressure.

                                                4 Inspect
                                                   upper eyelid
                                                   • Look under the upper eyelid to see
                                                     if a foreign object has lodged there.
                                                     To remove it, ask the victim to
                                                     grasp the upper lashes and pull
                                                     the eyelid over the lower one.
                                                   • If this fails to help, bathe the eye in
                                                     water and ask the victim to blink.

     2 Flush out object
       • If you can see something floating
         on the white of the eye or trapped
                                                5 Seek
                                                  •
                                                       medical help
                                                     If all your efforts to remove the
         under the lower lid, try to flush it        foreign object are unsuccessful,
         out with clean water.                       take the victim to the hospital.
       • Tilt the head so that the injured
         eye is lower than the other one.
       • Pour water carefully into
         the corner of the injured eye,
         allowing the liquid to drain away.
                                                !Important
                                                   • If anything is stuck to the eye, penetrating the
                                                     eyeball, or resting on the colored part of the
       • Alternatively, tell the victim to           eye, treat as for an eye wound (p.35).
         immerse her face in a sinkful of
         water and try blinking.                   • Do not touch the affected eye or allow the
                                                     victim to touch it.
                           FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE EYE • CHEMICALS IN THE EYE                       37

 Chemicals in the eye
 When splashes of chemicals get into the eyes, they
                                                                 SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 can cause serious damage, resulting in scarring
 and even blindness. The primary aim of first-aid                • Eye redness and swelling
 treatment is to effectively irrigate the eye, or flush it       • Watering of the eye
                                                                 • Sharp pain in the eye
 with water, in order to disperse hazardous substances.          • Signs of chemicals nearby
 The next step is to dress the eye, and then seek
 hospital care for the victim.

 TREATING CHEMICALS IN THE EYE

1 Rinse
  •
        eye
     If the victim cannot open his
                                              2 Seek
                                                •
                                                     medical help
                                                  Ask the victim to hold a sterile
     eye, use your finger and thumb to            pad, or one made from clean,
     gently separate the two eyelids.             nonfluffy material, such as a
   • Hold the affected eye under                  handkerchief, over the injured eye.
     gently running cold water for              • If possible, identify the chemical.
     at least 10 minutes.
                                                • Take or send him
   • careful that water being rinsed
     Be                                           to the hospital.
     from the injured eye does not
     drain into the other eye or splash
                                                     Cover
     either you or the victim.                       eye with
   • If it is easier, use a jug or glass             clean pad
     to pour water onto the eye.

                               Wear
                               protective
                               gloves

                                 Wash eye
                                 with cold
                                 water for
                                 10 minutes

                                              !Important
                                                • Do not touch the affected eye or allow the
                                                  victim to touch it.
                                                • If chemical spray is the irritant, face the
                                                  victim into the wind. Do not attempt to flush
                                                  it out using water.
                                                • Wear gloves to protect yourself.
38    FIRST AID

      Bleeding from the mouth
      Damage to a tooth and cuts to the mouth lining, lips, or tongue are common
      causes of bleeding from the mouth. The aim of first-aid treatment is to control
      severe bleeding; large amounts of blood, if swallowed, can cause vomiting,
      while inhalation of blood can cause choking.

      TREATING BLEEDING FROM THE MOUTH

     1 Control bleeding                              2 Monitor
                                                       •
                                                               wound
                                                            If the wound continues to bleed,
       • Ask the victim to sit
         with his head tilted                               take a fresh gauze pad and reapply
         forward. This                                      pressure for 10 more minutes.
         helps the blood to                                • Encourage the victim to spit out
         drain away. Give                                      blood rather than swallow it.
         him a bowl to
         spit into.
       • Press a gauze pad
         on the wound for up
         to 10 minutes to stop                                                  Press a pad
         the bleeding.                                                          on the wound

      TREATING A KNOCKED-OUT TOOTH

     1 Replant
       •
               tooth
         If an adult tooth is knocked out,
                                                     Reposition missing adult
                                                     tooth in its socket

         replant it in its socket as soon as
         possible and tell the victim to see
         a dentist right away.
       • If you cannot replant the tooth,
         keep it in milk or water until the
         victim reaches a dentist or doctor.
       • If a baby tooth is knocked out, do
         not attempt to replant it.

                                                     2Control bleeding
     ! Important
        • Do not wash the mouth out, as this
                                                          • If the knocked-out tooth cannot
                                                            be found, place a thick gauze pad
                                                            across the socket, making sure
          may disturb a clot.
                                                            that the pad stands higher than the
        • If the wound is large, or if it is still          teeth on either side of the gap.
          bleeding after 30 minutes of pressure,
          consult a dentist or doctor.
                                                          • Tell the victim to bite on the pad.
                                           BLEEDING FROM THE MOUTH • NOSEBLEED                             39

 Nosebleed
 A nosebleed is most often caused by the rupturing of blood vessels inside the
 nostrils. This can happen following a blow to the nose, sneezing or blowing
 the nose. Nosebleeds occur more frequently during bouts of cold or flu when
 the blood vessels are more fragile. The aims of first-aid treatment for a
 nosebleed are to control the bleeding and to comfort the victim. A child,
 in particular, may find the sight and smell of the blood upsetting.

 TREATING A NOSEBLEED

1 Control bleeding                                 3 Clean victim
  • Seat the victim with her head                    • When the bleeding has stopped,
    leaning forward over a bowl.                       clean the blood away with
  • Ask her to pinch her nose just                     lukewarm water, ensuring that the
    below the bridge and to breathe                    victim is still leaning forward.
    through her mouth. If the victim                 • Tell the victim to rest for a while.
    is a child, pinch it for her.                    • Advise her not to blow her nose
  • Tell her to avoid coughing, spitting,              as it could disturb the blood clots.
    sniffing, swallowing, or speaking,
    since any of these actions could
    disturb a blood clot.                           Clean gently
                                                    with cotton

                                Pinch her
                                nostrils
                                together for
                                10 minutes

                                Tell her to spit
                                into a bowl

2 Assess situation
  •After 10 minutes, release the
   pressure on the victim’s nose.
  • the bleeding continues when
   If
                                                   ! Important
                                                     • Do not allow the victim to lie down or tilt
   the pressure is released, pinch                     her head back; the blood could trickle
   her nose for 10 more minutes.                       down her throat and cause vomiting.
  • after 30 minutes, the nose is
   If,                                               • If the blood is thin and watery, this indicates a
   still bleeding, take her to the                     fractured skull. Seek medical help immediately.
   hospital. Keep her leaning forward.
40   FIRST AID

     Emergency childbirth
     Childbirth is rarely an emergency, since the very nature of labor means that it
     usually lasts for hours, therefore there is generally plenty of time to summon
     medical help. In the event that you do have to care for a woman who is about to
     give birth, however, your aims should be to call for medical help, to support the
     woman and keep her calm, and to care for the baby when he or she is born.

     TREATING EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH

     1 Summon
       •
              help
        Dial 911 or call EMS, telling
                                               3 Prepare equipment
                                                 •  Assemble as many of the following
        the dispatcher the name of the              items as possible: disposable
        hospital where the woman is due             gloves; face mask or piece of
        to give birth, her expected delivery        cotton material; sanitary napkins;
        date, and any other relevant                plastic bags; warm water; plastic
        information.                                sheeting or newspapers; clean

     2Make woman                                    towels; pillows; blankets.
                                                  • Wash your hands and nails
       comfortable                                  thoroughly, even if you will be
                                                    wearing disposable gloves.
       • Try to make the woman reasonably         • Put on a face mask or improvise
         comfortable as she copes with the          one out of clean cotton material.
         contractions. She may want to sit
         propped up, with her knees drawn         • Cover whatever surface the mother
         up, or she may prefer to kneel,            is laying on with plastic sheeting or
         with her upper body leaning on             newspapers. Add a layer of towels
         some pillows or folded blankets.           on top for comfort and absorbency.
         It is best to take the lead from
         her as to what is comfortable.
       • Encourage    her to breathe slowly
         during and after the contractions.
         Regular breathing should calm her
         and help with the pain; it also
         gives her something to
         concentrate on.
         Leaning forwards
         from a kneeling
         position can help
         to reduce back ache

                                                                              Support her
                                                                              with pillows
                                                          EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH                  41

4 Monitor birth                             6 Wrap baby
  • If the woman feels the urge to            • Wrap the baby in a clean blanket or
    push, encourage her to bear down            towel, still with the umbilical cord
    with each contraction.                      attached, and give her to
  • Tell her when the widest part of            the mother to hold.
    the baby’s head is visible. At this       • If the mother cannot
    point she needs to stop pushing             hold the baby, place
    and change her breathing                    the baby on her
    technique to panting.                       side on a firm
  • Check   for a layer of membrane             but soft
    over the baby’s face. If there is           surface.
    one, tear it away.
  • Check   that the umbilical cord is
    not wrapped around the baby’s
    neck. If it is, then very gently
    pull it over the baby’s head to
    prevent strangulation.
  • Once   the baby’s head and
    shoulders are visible, the next
    contraction should expel the
    rest of the baby’s body.

                                            7 Deliver
                                              •
                                                      afterbirth
                                                Mild contractions will continue
                                                after the baby is born until the
                                                placenta is delivered.
                                              • Put the placenta into a plastic bag
                                                so that a doctor or midwife can
                                                check that it is complete.
                                              • Clean the mother with warm
                                                water and towels and give her
                                                sanitary napkins to absorb any
                                                further bleeding.
                                              • Some   bleeding is normal, but if the
                                                bleeding seems excessive, massage
                                                the mother’s stomach just below
                                                the navel to help control the flow.
                                              • Advise the mother to breastfeed,
                                                if possible, because it encourages
                                                the uterus to contract.
5 Check baby
  •

  •
    Lift up the baby very carefully and
    lay her on her mother’s stomach.
    Newborn     babies will appear blue
                                            !Important
                                             • Do not give the mother anything to eat.
    initially. Look for signs of             • Do not pull the baby’s head and shoulders out.
    circulation (p.17). If the baby          • Do not cut the umbilical cord.
    remains blue and shows no signs of
    life, begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).    • Do not dispose of the afterbirth.
                                             • Do not smack the baby.
42    FIRST AID

      Major seizures
      A convulsion, or major seizure, is the result of an
                                                                    SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      electrical disturbance in the brain and consists of
      muscular spasms and loss of body control. Seizures            • Rigid body with arched
                                                                       back and clenched jaw
      that are recurrent usually indicate the brain disorder        • Eyes rolled upwards
      epilepsy. The aims of first-aid treatment for major           • Convulsive shaking
      seizures are to protect the victim from injuring              • Seizure followed by sleep
      herself and to summon medical help if necessary.

      TREATING MAJOR SEIZURES

     1 Protect
       •
               victim
         If you see the victim falling at
                                                3 Summon
                                                  •
                                                         help
                                                     If you know the victim has
         the beginning of the seizure, try           epilepsy, and she only has one
         to prevent injury as she falls.             seizure at this time, stay with her
       • Do   not move her while she is              until she has recovered.
         having the seizure.                       • If you are not certain that the
            • Loosen the clothing around her         victim is susceptible to epileptic
                neck and try to protect              seizures, dial 911 or call EMS.
                 her head with something           • If the victim remains unconscious
                   soft, such as a piece of          for more than 10 minutes or
                      folded clothing.               convulses for more than 5 minutes,
                                                     or if she has repeated seizures, dial
                                                     911 or call EMS.
                          Protect the              • Monitor    the victim’s breathing
                          victim’s head              (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a
                                                        child or baby), pulse (p.68 for
                                                            an adult, p.70 for a child
                                                                 or baby), and level of
                                                                        consciousness
                                                                                (p.12)
                                                                                until help
                                                                                arrives.

                                                               Do not try to restrain the
                                                               victim during the seizure

     2 Monitor victim
        • After the seizure, the victim may
         fall into a deep sleep. Check her
         breathing (p.14), open her airway,
                                                !Important
                                                   • Move sharp objects away from the victim.
         and be prepared to resuscitate her.       • Do not use force to restrain the victim.
        • the victim is breathing, place her
         If                                        • Do not put anything in the victim’s mouth.
         in the recovery position (pp.14–15).
                                                     MAJOR SEIZURES • FEBRILE SEIZURES                 43

 Febrile seizures
 Seizures that occur in young children as a result
                                                                      SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 of a very high temperature are known as febrile
 seizures. Children under the age of 5 are most likely                • Arched back, clenched fists,
                                                                        stiff legs and arms
 to suffer from a seizure, which is alarming to watch                 • Eyes rolled upwards
 but is rarely dangerous to the child. The aims of first-             • Head and body jerking
 aid treatment are to lower the child’s temperature,                  • High fever
 protect her from injury, and summon medical help.

 TREATING FEBRILE SEIZURES

1 Protect
  •
          child
     Place pillows, rolled-up blankets,
                                                    3 Get
                                                      •
                                                          help
                                                        Dial 911 or call EMS.
     towels, or clothing around the
     child to help protect her from injury.
   • Do  not move the victim while she
     is having a seizure.
                                                    4 Monitor victim
                                                      • Monitor the child’s temperature
2 Cool child                                            at regular intervals (p.70).
                                                      • Give the recommended dose
   • Remove clothing or bedcovers                       of acetaminophen liquid when
     to cool the child down.                            the seizures have stopped.
   • Working from the head down,                      • Stop cooling her down as soon
     sponge the child’s body all over                   as her temperature reaches a
     with tepid water.                                  normal 98.6°F (37°C).
   • Do  not dry the child; instead,

   •
     allow the moisture to evaporate
     from her skin.
     Do  not let her get too cold.
                                                    ! Important
                                                      • Do not use force in an attempt to restrain
                                                        the child.
                            Sponge the child with
                            tepid water until her     • Do not put anything in the child’s mouth.
                            temperature falls

     Use rolled-up
     towels or pillows
     to protect the child
44   FIRST AID

     Broken arm
     The fracture of an arm bone is not as serious as that
                                                                   SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
     of a leg bone (p.45) because the victim is usually
     able to walk and get to the hospital relatively easily.       • Limb held at awkward angle
     The aims of first-aid treatment for a broken arm are          • Limb cannot be moved
                                                                   • Severe pain
     to control any bleeding, to support the injured arm           • Swelling and bruising
     with a sling, and to transport the victim to the              • Possible wound above
                                                                     fracture site
     hospital, keeping the arm as still as possible.

     TREATING A BROKEN ARM

     1 Support arm                                 2 Put arm in sling
       • Sit the victim down.                        • Put some padding between the
       • If there is a wound, treat any                arm and the chest for comfort,
         bleeding (p.31).                              then support the injured arm
                                                       with a sling (p.63).
       • Ask the victim
         to support the                              • To keep the arm still, tie another
         injured arm across                            folded triangular bandage around
         his chest so that it                          the chest and over the sling.
         feels comfortable.
         Tell him to hold
         the injured                                                                   Tie sling
                                                                                       around
         hand a little                                Use extra                        neck
         higher than                                  bandage to
         the elbow.                                   keep the
                                                      arm still
       Keep the arm
       raised slightly

     !Important
      • Do not give the victim anything to eat,
         drink, or smoke.
      • If the elbow is injured, do not
         attempt to bend the arm. Lay the
         victim down, surround the limb
                                                   3 Seek
                                                     •
                                                          medical help
                                                       Take or send the victim to the
         with padding, and dial 911 or call EMS.       hospital to have the injury assessed.
      • An injured arm may not be fractured,         • Make sure that the arm is kept
         but if you are in doubt, treat it as a        still during the trip to the hospital.
         fracture until it can be x-rayed.
                                                       BROKEN ARM • BROKEN LEG                  45

 Broken leg
 The fracture of a leg bone is a serious injury that
                                                               SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 requires immediate hospital treatment. It is important
 that the victim does not put any weight on the                • Limb held at awkward angle
 injured limb. Thigh bone fractures may involve severe         • Limb cannot be moved
                                                               • Severe pain
 internal bleeding, which can cause shock. The aims            • Swelling and bruising
 of first-aid treatment are to control any bleeding, to        • Possible wound or internal
                                                                 bleeding if thigh is injured
 support the limb, and to dial 911 or call EMS.

 TREATING A BROKEN LEG

1 Support leg                                 2 Immobilize leg
  • Help the victim to lie down.               • If you can stay with the victim,
  • If there is a wound, treat                   and there is no need to move her,
    any bleeding (p.31).                         leave the padding in place and,
                                                 if necessary, support the leg
  • Put plenty of soft padding, such             with your hands.
    as rolled-up blankets or towels,
    on each side of the fractured leg.         • If you need to move the victim out
                                                 of danger, immobilize the injured
  • Dial 911 or                                  leg by bandaging it to the other
    call EMS.
                                                 one. Tie folded triangular
                                                 bandages around the joints above
                                                 and below the fracture site.

   Hold the injured                             Use a rolled-up towel
   leg steady                                   to support the leg

!Important
  • Do not give the victim anything to eat,
                                              3 Monitor victim
    drink, or smoke.                            •Watch for signs of shock (p.27).

  • Do not move the victim unless              • Check her breathing (p.68 for an
    she is in danger.
                                                 adult, p.71 for a baby or child)
                                                 and pulse (p.68 for an adult,
  • An injured leg may not be fractured,         p.70 for a baby or child) while
    but if you are in doubt, treat it as a       waiting for help to arrive.
    fracture until it can be x-rayed.
46   FIRST AID

     Spinal injuries
     Damage to the spinal cord can cause permanent loss
                                                                   SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
     of movement below the injured area, therefore all
     spinal injuries are potentially serious. The aims of          • Pain in neck or back
     first-aid treatment of a suspected spinal injury are to       • Burning sensation or
                                                                     tingling in a limb
     dial 911 or call EMS, and to keep the victim immobile         • Loss of feeling in a limb
     until medical help arrives, because even the slightest        • Inability to move legs
     movement could damage the spinal cord.

     TREATING SPINAL INJURIES

     1 Summon
       •
              help
        Dial 911 or call EMS.
                                                3 Monitor
                                                  •
                                                          victim
                                                     Monitor her breathing (p.68 for
                                                     an adult, p.71 for a child or baby),
                                                     pulse (p.68 for an adult, p.70 for
                                                     a child or baby), and level of
     2 Immobilize
       •
                  victim
        Leave the victim in the position in
                                                     consciousness (p.12) every 10
                                                     minutes while waiting for help.

        which you found her.
      • Reassure her and support her
        head to prevent any movement.
      • Ask someone to place rolled-up
                                                ! Important
                                                   • Do not move the victim unless she is
        clothes or towels on either side             in danger or needs to be resuscitated.
        of the victim’s head and body              • If she loses consciousness, open her airway
        to help keep her still.                      by tilting her head only slightly, and monitor
                                                     her breathing.
      • Stay with her until help arrives.
                                                   • If breathing becomes difficult for her, have
                                                     several other people help to move the victim
                                                     into the recovery position. Put your hands
                                                     over her ears to keep her head aligned and,
                                                     working as a team, roll her over very gently,
                                                     making sure that you keep the neck and
                                                     back aligned at all times.

                                Hold victim’s
                                head still
                                           SPINAL INJURIES • SPRAINS AND STRAINS                47

 Sprains and strains
 Sprains occur when ligaments and other tissues that
                                                              SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 surround and support a joint are torn or stretched.
 A strain refers to muscles or tendons that are               • Pain and swelling in the
                                                                 affected area
 damaged or overstretched. Both injuries may lead             • Deformity and discoloration
 to pain, swelling, deformity, and discoloration.
 Treatment follows the “RICE” procedure: rest,
 ice (or cold pack), compression, and elevation.

 TREATING SPRAINS AND STRAINS

1 Support
  •
          injury
    Steady and support the injured part.
                                            3 Apply
                                              •
                                                    compression
                                                 Place a thick layer of padding, such
  • For extra support, place the injured         as cotton wool, around the injury.
    limb on your knee or in your lap.          • Secure the padding in place with
                                                 a roller bandage (p.62) to apply a
                                                 gentle, even pressure to the
2 Cool
  •
       injury
    Prepare a cold compress: either
                                                 injured area. Make sure
                                                 that the bandage is not
                                                 too tight (p.61).
    soak a washcloth or towel in cold
    water and wring it out lightly,
    wrap a towel around a packet of
    frozen peas, or fill a plastic bag
    with small ice cubes. Apply the
    compress to the affected area to
    reduce swelling, bruising, and pain.
  • Do not apply ice directly to the
    skin, because this can burn it.
                                                                                 Secure
                                                                                 padding
                      Use cold                                                   with bandage
                      compress to
                      reduce swelling

                                            4 Elevate injury
                                               • Raise and support the limb to help
                                                 reduce bruising and swelling.
                                               • Advise the victim to rest the limb
                                                 and to see a doctor.

                                            ! Important
                                               • When you apply compression, make sure that
                                                 you do not obstruct the blood supply to the
                                                 tissues surrounding the injured area (p.61).
48    FIRST AID

      Severe burns
      A burn that affects all the layers of the skin or covers
                                                                    SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      a large area of the body is a severe burn. The aim of
      first-aid treatment is to cool down the affected area         • Skin that is red, brown
                                                                      and charred, or white
      rapidly to minimize damage and loss of body fluids,           • Blisters
      and therefore reduce the risk of developing shock.            • Unconsciousness
      Any burn larger than the palm of the victim’s hand,           • Clear fluid dripping from skin
                                                                    • Signs of shock (p.27)
      whatever the depth, needs hospital treatment.

      TREATING SEVERE BURNS

     1 Put
       •
           out fire
          If the victim’s clothing is on fire,
                                                 3 Expose
                                                   •
                                                          injury
                                                      Gently remove any clothing, shoes,
          force her to the ground and use             belts, or jewelry near the burn, but
          a wool or cotton blanket, rug, or           leave anything that is stuck to it.
          coat to smother the flames (p.182).       • Cover the burn with a sterile wound
        • If possible, have someone dial 911          dressing or clean nonfluffy material.
          or call EMS for medical help and,
          if necessary, the fire department.
                                                 4 Make victim
     2 Cool
       •
            burn
         Immerse the burn in cool water,
                                                    comfortable
                                                    • Lay the victim down, keeping the
         douse it with water, or cover it             burn away from the ground and, if
         with cold, wet towels for at least           possible, above heart level.
         10 minutes.                                • Dial 911 or call EMS if help is not
        • there is no water, use cold milk
         If                                           already on the way.
         or a canned drink to cool the burn.

                                                 5 Monitor victim
                                                    • Monitor the victim’s breathing
                                                      (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a child
                                                      or baby), pulse (p.68 for an adult,
                                                      p.70 for a child or baby), and level
                                                      of consciousness (p.12) every 10
                                                      minutes while waiting for help.
                                                    • Watch for signs of shock (p.27).

                                                 ! Important
                                                    • Do not apply any ointments to the burn.
                                                    • Do not touch the burn or burst any blisters.
                                                    • Do not put ice or iced water on the burn.
                                        SEVERE BURNS • SMALL BURNS AND SCALDS                    49

 Minor burns and scalds
 A burn that damages only the outer layer of the skin
                                                               SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 or affects a relatively small area is a minor burn or
 scald. Although such burns can be red and painful             • Red and painful skin
 and may swell and blister, most heal well within a            • Blisters dripping clear fluid
 few days if treated promptly. Your aims are to cool
 the burn and to cover it with a sterile wound
 dressing to minimize the risk of infection.

 TREATING MINOR BURNS AND SCALDS

1 Cool
  •
       burn
   Pour cool water over the injured
                                            3 Dress
                                              •
                                                    burn
                                                 Cover the burn with a sterile wound
   area for at least 10 minutes.                 dressing or clean nonfluffy material.
  • there is no water, use cold milk
   If                                          • Wrap   a bandage loosely over the
   or a canned drink to cool the burn.           dressing to secure it (p.61).

                                             Wear gloves
                                             to reduce
                                             risk of
                                             infection

                     Cool the burn
                     with water

                                           4 Monitor wound
                                               • Check the wound daily for any
                                                 signs of infection, such as pain,
                                                 swelling, redness, or pus.
                                               • If you suspect that it has become
2 Expose
  •
         injury
    Gently remove any clothing,
                                                 infected, advise the victim to see a
                                                 doctor at once.

    shoes, belts, or jewelry near the
    burn before the area starts to
    swell and blister.
                                            ! Important
                                               • Do not apply anything other than cool
  • Do not remove anything that                  liquid to the burn.
    is stuck to the burn because
    this could worsen the injury.
                                               • Do not touch the burn or burst any blisters.
                                               • Do not put ice or iced water on the burn.
50    FIRST AID

      Sunburn
      Ultraviolet rays in sunlight can damage cells in the
                                                                      SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      outer layer of human skin, causing soreness, redness,
      and blistering. Skin can burn after just 30 minutes            • Very red, hot skin
      of exposure to the sun and sunburn is most likely to           • Soreness
                                                                     • Swelling
      occur in the middle of the day, though symptoms may            • Blistering
      not develop immediately. The aims of treatment are             • Possible signs of heatstroke
                                                                        (p.52)
      to move the victim out of the sun, to cool the affected
      area, and to apply soothing lotions or creams.

      TREATING SUNBURN

     1 Move victim inside 3 Give fluid
       •                    •
         If the victim is outside, move him              See that the
         into the shade or indoors.                      victim sips                      Ensure that
                                                         plenty of cold                   he takes
                                                         water while                      small sips

     2 Cool
                                                                                          of fluid
            burn                                         you cool
                                                         his skin.
       • Get the victim into a cold bath, or
         apply damp towels or cold water to
         the burn for at least 10 minutes.
                           Cool the
                           burned
                           areas

                                                      4 Apply lotion
                                                        • Gently smooth calamine lotion
                                                         or after-sun cream onto the burned
                                                         areas. Reapply as necessary.

     !Important
       • If the skin is badly blistered, advise the             Put cream
         victim to see a doctor.                                on burn

       • If the victim has severe sunburn and
         heatstroke (p.52), call 911.
                                                   SUNBURN • HEAT EXHAUSTION                  51

 Heat exhaustion
 Caused by excessive sweating, heat exhaustion
                                                             SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 occurs when vital salt and water are lost through
 the skin. People who are unused to hot and humid            • Feeling dizzy or confused
 conditions, and those suffering from any illness that       • Headache and nausea
                                                             • Sweating, with pallid,
 causes diarrhea and vomiting, are often the most               clammy skin
 susceptible. The aims of first-aid treatment are to         • Arm, leg, or abdominal
                                                                cramps
 cool the victim and to replace lost salts and water.        • Fast but weak pulse
 Heat exhaustion can develop into heatstroke.

 TREATING HEAT EXHAUSTION

1 Make victim                              3 Summon help
  comfortable                                •  If the victim becomes weaker
                                                or confused, place him in the
  • Move the victim to a cool place.            recovery position (p.14 for adults
  • Lay him down and support his                and children, p.15 for babies).
    legs in a raised position to improve      • Dial 911 or call EMS.
    the blood flow to vital organs.

2 Replace
  •
          lost fluids 4 Monitor victim
    Give him cool, salty drinks.              • Monitor the victim’s breathing
    Ideally, offer isotonic drinks or           (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a child
    a weak salt and sugar solution              or baby), pulse (p.68 for an adult,
    (1 teaspoon of salt and 4 teaspoons         p.70 for a child or baby), and level
    of sugar to 1 liter of water).              of consciousness (p.12) every
  • Support   his head while he is              10 minutes until help arrives.
    drinking, if necessary.
  • If he recovers, ask
    him to see a doctor.

  Give him
                                           ! Important
                                             • If the victim loses consciousness, open his
  a cool
                                               airway, check his breathing, and be prepared
  isotonic                                     to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
  drink

                                                                         Raise
                                                                         his legs
52   FIRST AID

     Heatstroke
     If the human body is exposed to unusually high
                                                                 SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
     temperatures for a prolonged period, it can become
     dangerously overheated. The onset of heatstroke can        • Headache and dizziness
     be sudden, and the victim may lose consciousness           • Hot, flushed skin
                                                                • Poor level of response
     within minutes. The aims of first-aid treatment are        • Rapid pulse
     to move the victim to a cool place, to reduce his          • Raised body temperature
                                                                   (over 104°F/40°C)
     temperature, and to get him to a hospital quickly.

     TREATING HEATSTROKE

     1 Make victim                             4 Monitor victim
      comfortable                                • Once the victim’s temperature has
                                                   fallen to 98.6°F (37°C) under the
      • Move the victim to                         tongue or 97.7°F (36.5°C) beneath
        a cool place.                              the armpit, replace the wet sheet
      • Remove    as much                          (if used) with a dry one.
        of his clothing                          • Monitor the victim’s condition
        as possible.                               until medical help arrives.
        Lay him down                             • If his temperature rises again, cool
        in a cool place                                 him down following the same
                                                          procedure as before.

                                                              Remove his
                                                              clothes

     2Summon help
      • Dial 911 or call EMS.
                                               ! Important
                                                 • If the victim loses consciousness, open his
                                                   airway, check his breathing, and be prepared
                                                   to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).

     3 Cool victim
      • Drape a cold, wet sheet over the                                       Sponge his face
        victim. Spray or sprinkle it with                                      and body with
        water to keep it wet. Alternatively,                                   tepid water
        sponge him with cold or tepid
        water, or fan him with cold air.
      • Keep cooling the victim until his
        temperature drops to 100°F (38°C)
        under the tongue or 99°F (37.4°C)
        beneath the armpit (p.68 for an
        adult, p.70 for a child or baby).
                                                              HEATSTROKE • FAINTING              53

 Fainting
 Pain, fright, fatigue, hunger, emotion, or simply
                                                               SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 standing still for a long period of time have all been
 known to interrupt the flow of oxygen to the brain,           • Feeling dizzy, weak, and
                                                                   sometimes nauseous
 which can cause a temporary loss of consciousness,            •   Sweating
 or a faint. Your aims are to improve bloodflow to             •   Very pale skin
 the victim’s brain, to make her comfortable, and              •   Low pulse rate

 to treat any injuries that may have occurred when             •   Brief loss of consciousness

 the victim fell. Recovery is usually rapid.

 TREATING FAINTING

1 Raise legs                                 3 Treat any injuries
  • If the victim has fainted, gently          • Look for any injuries that the
     raise her legs above the level of           victim may have sustained when
     her heart to improve blood flow.            she fell after fainting.
              • If she feels faint but has     • Treat these injuries appropriately.
                 not fainted, ask her to
                 lay down, and to raise
                 her legs.
              • Support her legs with
                                             4 Help victim up
                 your body or with a pile      • When the victim feels better, help
                  of cushions, pillows,          her to sit up very slowly.
                   or folded blankets.         • the victim begins to feel faint
                                                 If
                                                 again, help her to lay down.
                         Support legs
                         above level           • Raise   and support her legs again,
                         of heart                until she feels fully recovered.
                                               • Help her to sit up again, moving
                                                 very slowly and making sure that
                                                 she no longer feels faint.
                                                 • If in doubt about the victim,
                                                    call her doctor. See chart p.82
                                                    Feeling faint/passing out.
2 Make victim
   comfortable
   • Loosen any restrictive clothing.
   • Ensure that the victim gets plenty
     of fresh air. If you are indoors,
                                             ! Important
                                               • If the victim does not regain consciousness,
     open a window or fan her face.              open her airway, check her breathing, and be
   • Keep  bystanders away.                      prepared to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
   • Reassure the victim as she                • Dial 911 or call EMS.
     recovers from the faint.
54    FIRST AID

      Hypothermia
      The onset of hypothermia is a reaction to the cold
                                                                     SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      and happens when body temperature falls below 95°F
      (35°C). Hypothermia may develop gradually if the               • Shivering
      victim is in a poorly heated house, or rapidly if the          • Cold, pallid skin
                                                                     • Weak pulse
      victim is in freezing weather or immersed in cold              • Confusion and apathy
      water. Your aims are to warm the victim gradually              • Extreme fatigue
      and to seek medical help if needed.

      TREATING HYPOTHERMIA

     1 Rewarm victim                                2 Warm victim
       • Get the victim into a shelter.                in bed
       • Replace any wet clothes with                  • Put the victim to bed and cover
         warm, dry clothes and then
                                                         her well with blankets.
         wrap her in a survival blanket.
       • If the victim is indoors, is young            • she is still very cold, help her
                                                         If
                                                         put on a hat and gloves.
         and healthy, and is not lethargic
                or confused, help her into             • Give her a warm drink to sip.
                 a warm, but not hot, bath
                   and allow her to soak.           Cover her
                                                    head with   Help her to
                                   After a bath,    a hat       sip a warm
                                   wrap her in                  drink
                                   warm towels

     !Important
       • Do not give the victim alcohol to drink.
       • Do not give the victim a hot-water
         bottle or place her beside a fire or any
         other source of heat.
       • If the victim loses consciousness, open
                                                    3Summon
                                                     •
                                                            help
                                                         If the victim is elderly or a baby,
         her airway, check her breathing, and be         or if her condition worries you,
         prepared to begin resuscitation                 call a doctor.
         (pp.12–20).
                                                         HYPOTHERMIA • FROSTBITE        55

 Frostbite
 Frostbite occurs when the body reacts to freezing
                                                             SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 conditions, particularly those accompanied by a high
 windchill factor, by shutting down blood vessels. As        • Sensation of pins
                                                               and needles
 a result, extremities, such as fingers and toes, may        • Pale skin becoming
 freeze and if left untreated, could eventually become         numb and hard

 gangrenous. Hypothermia (p.54) may also occur.              • Skin is white, mottled
                                                               blue, or black
 The aims of first-aid treatment are to rewarm the
 frostbitten area gradually and to seek medical help.

 TREATING FROSTBITE

1 Warm frozen part 2 Apply dressing
  • Get the victim to tuck her frozen        • Cover the affected part with a
    hands into her armpits, or place           light dressing, wrapping the
    the frostbitten part in your lap,          dressing between frostbitten
    between your hands to warm it.             fingers and toes, and cover the
  • Move the victim out of the cold;           part with a loose gauze bandage.
    help her if her feet are affected.       • Support the part in a raised position
  • Thaw the frostbitten part in a basin       to reduce the chance of swelling.
    of warm water, then pat it dry.

                 Use your body
                 heat to thaw
                 frostbitten toes

                                             Cover with light
                                             dressing and bandage

                                           3 Relieve pain
! Important                                  • As the area thaws, the skin will
                                               become hot, red, and painful.
  • Do not place a source of direct heat     • Give  the victim the recommended
    against the frostbitten part.              dose of acetaminophen to help
                                               ease the pain.
  • Do not warm the frostbitten part if
    it may refreeze.                         • Take  the victim to the hospital or
                                               arrange for transportation.
  • Do not rub the frostbitten part.
56    FIRST AID

      Swallowed poisons
      Poisoning can occur as a result of swallowing toxic
                                                                 SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      chemicals or poisonous plants, or by overdosing
      on recreational or medicinal drugs. Seek immediate         • Pain in the abdomen or chest
      medical assistance and provide the emergency               • Nausea, vomiting, and
                                                                   diarrhea
      services with as much information as possible about        • Breathing difficulties
      the poisoning, including the type of substance that        • Dizziness
      was swallowed, the amount, and when.

      TREATING SWALLOWED POISONS

     1 Get
       •
           information
         If the victim is conscious, ask her
                                               3 Monitor
                                                 •
                                                         victim
                                                   Monitor the victim’s breathing
         what poison she has swallowed.            (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a child
       • Look around her for                       or baby), pulse (p.68 for an adult,
         signs of bottles                          p.70 for a child or baby), and level
         or containers.                            of consciousness (p.12) every 10
                                                   minutes until help arrives.
        Ask victim for                           • Watch for signs of deterioration.
        details of
        poisoning                                • If alcohol poisoning is a possibility,
                                                   cover the victim with a blanket.

                                               ! Important
                                                 • Do not try to induce vomiting.
                                                 • Some poisons can cause anaphylactic shock.
                                                   Look for warning signs (p.28).
                                                 • If the victim loses consciousness, open her
                                                   airway, check her breathing, and be prepared
                                                   to begin resuscitation (pp.12–20).
                                                 • If you need to give rescue breaths to a victim
     2 Summon help
       • Dial 911 or call EMS.
                                                   who has swallowed a corrosive poison,
                                                                 protect yourself by using a
                                                                      face shield (see below).

       • Tell the dispatcher
          what you think
          the victim
          has swallowed.

                                                                                  Place the shield on
                                                                                  the victim’s face,
                                                                                  with the filter over
                                                                                  her mouth
                                       SWALLOWED POISONS • SNAKE AND SPIDER BITES                   57

 Snake and spider bites
 A bite from a venomous snake or spider can cause
                                                                    SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 severe pain and burning at the site of the wound,
 in addition to swelling and discoloration. Most                        • Severe pain and burning
 victims of such bites recover rapidly if they receive                  • Pair of puncture marks
                                                                          (snake bite)
 prompt hospital treatment and are given the                            • Nausea and vomiting
 appropriate antivenin. The aims of first-aid                           • Sweating
 treatment are to seek medical assistance quickly
                                                                        • Breathing difficulties
                                                                        • Irregular heartbeat
 and to try to identify the snake or spider.

 TREATING SNAKE AND SPIDER BITES

1 Keep victim still                             4 Immobilize
  •  Lay the victim down, keeping the
     heart above the level of the bite.
                                                   injured part
                                                   • Place a light compression bandage
   • Keep the victim calm and still.                on the affected part to minimize
                                                    blood flow. Start bandaging
                                                    just above the bite and continue
2 Clean
  •
        wound
     Wash the wound carefully.
                                                    up the limb.
                                                   • a leg is affected,
                                                    If
                                                    tie both legs
   • Pat it dry with clean swabs or                 together
     other nonfluffy material, but
                                                    with folded
     do not rub it.
                                                    triangular
                                                    bandages.

3 Summon help                                      Bind legs together

  •  Dial 911 or call EMS.
   • If possible, give
                                               4   to immobilize
                                                   injured leg

     the dispatcher a
     description of the
     snake or spider
     that has bitten
     the victim.

! Important
   • Do not catch a venomous spider
                                                5 Monitor condition
                                                   • Monitor the victim’s breathing
     or snake to try to identify it.
                                                     (p.68 for an adult, p.71 for a child
   • Do not apply a tourniquet.                      or baby), pulse (p.68 for an adult,
   • Do not cut the wound open or                    p.70 for a child or baby), and level
     attempt to suck out the venom.                  of consciousness (p.12) every
                                                     10 minutes until help arrives.
58    FIRST AID

      Animal and tick bites
      Any animal bite carries a high risk of transmitting
                                                                  SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
      infection and should be seen by a doctor. Antibiotics
      or tetanus immunization may be required. Your aims          • Puncture marks (animal)
      are to stop the bleeding and clean the wound. Treating      • Pea-sized body attached
                                                                    to skin (tick)
      a tick bite involves removing the whole tick.

      TREATING ANIMAL BITES

     1 Make
       •
            victim safe
         Remove the victim from any
                                               3 Treat
                                                 •
                                                       small wound
                                                     If the wound is superficial, wash it
         danger, if possible.                        with soap and water and pat it dry.
                                                     Cover with a dressing (p.61).
                                                   • Advise the victim to ask his or her
                                                     doctor if immunization is needed.

     2 Treat severe
        wound
        • If the wound is serious, treat as
                                               ! Important
                                                  • Do not try to capture the animal.
          for severe bleeding (p.31).
                                                  • Severe infections can be transmitted by
        • Take or send the victim to the            animal bites. Seek medical advice in all cases.
          hospital for urgent treatment.

      TREATING TICK BITES

     1 Remove
       •
              tick
         Using a pair of fine-pointed
                                               3 Monitor
                                                 •
                                                         victim
                                                    Look out for a rash at the site of
         tweezers, grasp the tick on either         the bite and/or flulike symptoms
                            side of its body        days after the bite. In either case,
                            (including head         send or take the victim to a doctor
                            and mouthparts).        in case he or she has developed
                          • Lever out the           an infection. Tell the doctor
                            tick with a             that the victim was bitten by a tick.
                            rocking motion.

     2 Dress wound                             ! Important
                                                  • Do not apply a hot match, alcohol, or
       • Wash your hands thoroughly.                any other substance to the tick in an
                                                    attempt to remove it.
       • Clean the wound with antiseptic.
       • Cover with an adhesive dressing.         • Ensure that you remove both the head
                                                    and the body of the tick.
                       ANIMAL AND TICK BITES • INSECT AND SCORPION STINGS                    59

 Insect and scorpion stings
 Bee, wasp, and hornet stings are painful but are not
                                                              SIGNS & SYMPTOMS
 usually life-threatening. There may be a sharp pain
 followed by temporary swelling, soreness, and itching.       • Stinger stuck in skin
 Your aims are to watch out for signs of anaphylactic         • Swollen red area
                                                              • Localized pain
 shock, to remove the stinger, to dress the wound, and
 to reduce swelling. Scorpion stings can be life-
 threatening and need urgent medical attention.

 TREATING STINGS IN THE SKIN

1 Remove sting                            2 Treat wound
  • If there is a stinger in the wound,       • Wash the injured area with soap
    gently scrape it off with your              and water, and pat dry.
    fingernail or a credit card.              • Cover   the wound area with an
  • Do not grasp the venom sac with             adhesive dressing.
    your fingers or tweezers because          • Apply a cold compress on top of
    pressure on the sac may inject              the adhesive dressing to reduce
    more venom into the victim.                 pain and swelling.

  Scrape in the
                                              • Advise   the victim to seek medical
  opposite direction                            help if symptoms persist.
  to entry

                                          ! Important
                                              • Dial 911 if the victim has been stung by a
                                                scorpion or shows signs of anaphylactic
                                                shock (p.28).

 TREATING STINGS IN THE MOUTH

1 Reduce
  •
         swelling
    In order to reduce swelling, give
                                             Soothe sting
                                             with water

    the victim a glass of cold water to
    sip or ice to suck.

2 Summon help
   • Dial 911 or call EMS.
60   FIRST AID

     First-aid equipment
     Having the correct supplies can make a big difference in an emergency, so you
     should always keep a selection of essential first-aid materials at home and in
     your car. Store the items in a first-aid box or in a similar type of airtight
     container in a dry place. The box should be easily accessible in an emergency
     but kept away from other medicines and out of reach of children. Ideally,
     the box should be small and light enough for you to carry easily. Check and
     replenish the first-aid kit regularly so that the contents are kept up to date.

                                     HOME FIRST-AID KIT

           ADHESIVE            TRIANGULAR BANDAGES               CREPE ROLLER BANDAGES                 GAUZE ROLLER
           BANDAGES                 for use as a sling to        for applying pressure to a             BANDAGES
        for covering small        support and immobilize           wound or to support a            for holding dressings in
         cuts and scrapes             an injured limb                 strain or sprain           place on any part of the body

                                                                           Applicator
                                                                    Bandage
                                                                                                           TWEEZERS
                                                                                                          for removing
                                                                                                            splinters

                                        WOUND DRESSING               TUBULAR BANDAGE
         GAUZE DRESSINGS                sterile dressings that        used with a special                  SCISSORS
        light dressings for use        combine bandage and            applicator to secure            for cutting dressings
          directly on wounds               dressing in one        dressings on fingers or toes            and bandages

         ANTISEPTIC WIPES                ANTISEPTIC CREAM                 MICROPOROUS TAPE                 SAFETY PINS
         for cleaning wounds           used on cuts and scrapes            breathable, low-tack        for securing bandages
                                       to help prevent infection             tape for holding                and slings
                                                                            dressings in place

                                        FACE SHIELD                DISPOSABLE GLOVES                      COLD PACK
       CALAMINE LOTION            for protection from cross-      for protection from cross-             for reducing
       for treating sore and        infection when giving          infection when touching             swelling in sprains
          sunburned skin                rescue breaths                    body fluids                     and strains
                                                              FIRST-AID EQUIPMENT          61

 APPLYING A WOUND DRESSING

1 Apply dressing pad 3 Secure bandage
  •                    •
    Wash your hands thoroughly and               Tie the ends of the bandage
    wear disposable gloves, if available.        together over the pad.
  • Choose a dressing with a pad that          • Check the circulation (see below)
    will cover an area 1 in (2.5 cm)             and, if necessary, loosen the
    beyond the edges of the wound.               bandage and reapply.
  • Unroll the bandage until the pad           • If blood seeps through, apply
    is visible, leaving a short “free”           another dressing over the top. If it
    end on one side of the pad and               seeps through the second dressing,
    a roll of bandage on the other.              remove both and start again.
  • Place  the dressing pad directly
                                             Make turns
    on the wound.                            with the main
                                             bandage

2 Bandage in place
 • Secure the pad in place by winding                                          Hold the
   the short end of the bandage once                                           short end
   around the dressing and limb.
 • Keep hold of the short end and
   wind the bandage roll around
   the dressing and limb. Continue
   winding the bandage until the
   pad is completely covered.

 CHECKING CIRCULATION

1 Apply pressure                            2 Loosen bandage
  • Immediately after bandaging a limb,        • If the skin color does not return
    check the circulation in the fingers         immediately, the bandage is too
    or toes beyond the bandage.                  tight and should be loosened.
  • Press on a nail or on the skin             • Undo a few turns of the bandage.
    until the area turns pale, then              Wait for the color to return to the
    release the pressure. The color              skin, and reapply the bandage more
    should return immediately.                   loosely. Check circulation again.

                                            3 Monitor
                                              •
                                                      casualty
                                                 Every 10 minutes, check fingers
                                                 or toes for signs of poor circulation
                                                 such as pale, cold skin, or numbness.
                                                 Loosen the bandage and reapply
                                                 if necessary.
62    FIRST AID

      APPLYING A HAND OR FOOT BANDAGE

     1 Start
       •
             at wrist
         Place the end of the bandage on the
                                                  2 Repeat
                                                    •
                                                           layers
                                                     Take the bandage diagonally
         underside of the wrist at the base          across the back of the hand, then
         of the thumb (or ankle for a foot           around the wrist and back over
         bandage); secure the end by making          the hand towards the little finger.
         a straight turn around the wrist.         • Continue, covering two-thirds of the
       • Bring the bandage diagonally across         previous layer with each new turn.
         the back of the victim’s hand in          • When   the hand is covered, make
         the direction of the little finger.         two straight turns around the wrist
       • Take the bandage under and across           (or ankle) and secure the bandage.
         the fingers so that the upper edge        • Check  the circulation in the fingers
         touches the index finger about half         and toes beyond the bandage (see
         way up its length.                          p.61) and loosen it if necessary.
                                                   Leave
                                                   fingertips and
                                                   thumb free

         Bring bandage
         diagonally
         across hand

      APPLYING A TUBULAR BANDAGE

     1 Apply
       •
             first layer
         Cut a length of tubular gauze
                                                  2 Apply
                                                    •
                                                          second layer
                                                      Push the applicator back over the
         bandage two-and-a-half times the             injured finger, until the finger is
         length of the injured finger or toe.         covered with the rest of the gauze.
       • Push   the gauze on to the applicator,     • Remove   the applicator.
         and gently place the applicator over
         the finger.
       • Hold    the gauze in place at the base
         of the finger and pull the applicator
                                                  3 Secure
                                                    •
                                                           bandage
                                                      Secure the end of the gauze to the
         off, leaving a layer of gauze behind.
                                                      finger with a piece of adhesive tape,
       • Hold    the applicator just beyond           leaving a gap in one place.
         the fingertip and twist
         it twice.                                  • Make sure the bandage is not too
                                                      tight. If the victim complains of
                                                      pale cold skin, numbness, or an
                                                      inability to move the finger or toe,
                                                      remove the bandage and hold the
                                                      dressing in place by hand.
                                                           FIRST-AID EQUIPMENT        63

 TYING AN ARM SLING

1 Support
  •
          arm
   Support the injured arm under
                                         3 Secure sling
                                           • Tie a knot at the hollow over the
   the forearm or ask the victim to          victim’s collarbone on the injured
   support it with his other arm.            side of the body.
 • Pass one end of the bandage under       • Tuck both ends
   the victim’s elbow on the injured         of the bandage
   limb and pull the bandage across          under the knot
   to the opposite shoulder, so that         to act as
   the longest edge is parallel with         padding.
   his uninjured side.

                                           Tie knot over
                                           collarbone

  Longest
  edge of
  bandage
                               Support
                               forearm

                                         4 Secure at elbow
                                           • Fold the point of the bandage
                                             forwards at the elbow and tuck
                                             any loose bandage underneath it.
                                           • Secure the point of the bandage
                                             to the front of the bandage with
                                             a safety pin, or twist the corner

2 Form
  •
       sling
   Bring the lower half of the bandage
                                           •
                                             and tuck it into the sling.
                                             Check   the circulation in the fingers
                                             after securing the sling, and again
   up over the forearm to meet the           every 10 minutes (see p.61). If
   other end of the bandage at the           necessary, remove the sling and
   shoulder on the injured side.             straighten the arm.
 • Position the
   forearm so
   that the hand
   is slightly                                                          Use safety
   higher than                               Fold point                 pin to
                                                                        secure
   the elbow.                                forwards

 Leave
 fingers
 exposed
                                                         2
                             FAMILY
              ILLNESS
    When a family member is ill, turn to the symptoms charts in this
    section to find out what is wrong. From facial pain to abdominal
     pain, wheezing to swollen ankles, these charts provide possible
        reasons for the symptoms and indicate how you can help.

How to use this section .66               Coughing (adults) .........106           Leg pain .......................145
Assessing symptoms                        Coughing (children) ......108            Joint pain.....................146
(adults) ............................68   Shortness of breath                      Swollen ankles.............148
Assessing symptoms                        (adults) ..........................110   Erectile dysfunction ....150
(children) .........................70    Breathing problems                       Testes and scrotum
Not feeling well ............72           (children) .......................112    problems......................151
Fever (adults) ..................74       Wheezing.....................114         Penis problems ............152
Fever (children) ...............76        Difficulty swallowing...115              Breast problems ..........154
Excessive sweating ........78             Vomiting (adults) ..........116          Menstrual period pain156
Lumps and swellings .....80               Vomiting (children) .......118           Heavy menstrual
Feeling faint/                            Abdominal pain                           periods .........................157
passing out ....................82        (adults) ..........................120   Abnormal vaginal
Headache.......................84         Abdominal pain                           bleeding.......................158
                                          (women) ........................122      Vaginal discharge........160
Vertigo ...........................86
                                          Abdominal pain                           Genital irritation
Numbness and/
                                          (children) .......................124    (women) ........................161
or tingling......................88
                                          Abdominal swelling ....126               Home medicine chest...162
Facial pain......................90
                                          Anal and rectal                          Caring for a
Difficulty speaking ........91
                                          problems......................127        sick person ...................164
Forgetfulness or
                                          Diarrhea (adults) ...........128
confusion .......................92
                                          Diarrhea (children) ........130
General skin problems...94
                                          Constipation ................132
Rash with fever .............96
                                          Chest pain....................134
Eye pain or irritation .....98
                                          Palpitations..................136
Disturbed/impaired
vision............................100     Poor bladder control...137
Earache ........................102       Painful urination .........138
Sore throat ..................103         Back pain .....................140
Hoarseness or loss                        Neck pain or stiffness...142
of voice ........................104      Arm or hand pain .......144
66   FAMILY ILLNESS

     How to use this section
     This section contains a selection of charts describing symptoms that may cause
     concern to family members. At the beginning of the section, there is advice on
     how to assess symptoms of illness, such as how to measure body temperature,
     take a pulse, and check breathing rates. At the end of the section, there are
     guidelines for looking after a sick person at home, with suggestions for which
     medicines to keep in the home and how to administer them.

     HOW TO USE THE CHARTS
                                84    FAMILY ILLNESS

                                      Headache                                                                                           How is your
                                                                                                                                           vision?

     Introductory text
     This text describes
                                      Fever and tension in head and neck muscles are
                                      common causes of headache. Too much alcohol,                !   Danger signs
                                                                                                      Dial 911 or call EMS if a
                                                                                                                                        Blurred vision
                                      caffeine, or nicotine may also cause headache. Most             headache is accompanied
     common causes of the             headaches do not last for more than a few hours. If             by any of the following            Disturbed in
     relevant symptom.                your headache lasts for more than 24 hours, is not
                                                                                                      symptoms:                          other ways
                                                                                                      • Drowsiness or confusion.
                                      improved by over-the-counter analgesics, or recurs              • Weakness of a limb.
                                                                                                                                          Unchanged
                                      several times in a week, consult your doctor.                   • Blurred vision.
                                                                                                      • Dislike of bright light.
                                                                                                      • Temporary unconsciousness.

                                                  Have you hit             Do you have                                                    ACTION
                                     START         your head                a fever – a                                              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                 within the past          temperature of                                             You have probably a
                                                   24 hours?               100.4°F (38°C)                                            migraine, particularly
     Starting point                                                         or above?
                                                                                                               ACTION
                                                                                                                                     if any visual problems
                                                                                                                                     occurred before the
     From the starting point,                      Head injury                                            GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                                                                                                                     headache. However,
                                                                                                                                     the slight chance of a
     question and arrow                                                          Fever                    Fever (adults), p.74, or
                                                                                                                                     more serious disorder,
                                                                                                          Fever (children), p.76
     pathways guide you                          No head injury                                                                      such as a stroke, needs
                                                                                                                                     to be ruled out if this
                                                                               No fever
     around the chart.                                                                                                               is your first migraine.
                                                                                                                                     • Take an analgesic
                                                                                                                                     and sips of water.
                                                                                                                                     • Rest in a darkened,
                                                                              ACTION                          Have you               quiet room until the
                                                    Are danger          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES               experienced             pain subsides.
                                                  signs present         A mild headache is                  nausea and/or            If you have had any
                                                 (see box above         common following a                                           previous attacks, try
     Question box                                 right) or have        minor head injury.
                                                                                                            vomiting with
                                                                                                            the headache?
                                                                                                                                     to identify and avoid
                                                                                                                                     potential triggers, such
     Each question is                             you vomited?          • Take an analgesic                                          as chocolate.
                                                                        (not aspirin).
     followed by two or                            Danger signs         CALL YOUR DOCTOR                            Yes
                                                                        IMMEDIATELY
     more possible answers.                          present            if your headache lasts                                         Does either of
                                                                        for more than 2 hours
     Choose the one that is                       Vomited after         or if you develop other
                                                                                                                    No                 the following
                                                   head injury          symptoms.                                                         apply?
     most applicable.
                                                 No danger signs                                                                        The pain is felt
                                                   or vomiting                                                                           chiefly in the
                                                                              ACTION                                                   areas above and
                                                                        TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES                                          below the eyes
     Self-help advice                                                   Sinusitis is the likely
                                                                        cause of your headache.                                       You have recently
     This text describes what                       ACTION              • Try inhaling steam                                           had a runny or
                                                                        from a bowl of hot
     you can do to treat the                                            water (p.165).
                                                                                                                                         stuffy nose

     symptom at home and                     !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                               There may be damage
                                             to the tissues that
                                                                        CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                        if you feel no better                                               Neither
     when you should                         surround the brain.        within 2 days.

     consult your doctor.

     Action panels                     Possible cause                                 Cross-references
     The text indicates how            This text suggests                             The charts feature cross-
     urgently you should see           what may have                                  references to other charts
     a doctor.                         caused the symptom.                            containing further information.
                                                                                                  HOW TO USE THIS SECTION                            67

                       SPECIAL BOXES

                       • Red danger signs and warning
                                                                    !Danger signs                                Checking a red rash

                             boxes alert you to situations in
                             which emergency medical help            !   Recurring attacks
                                                                         of vertigo
                                                                                                                   Safe alcohol limits
                                                                                                                   One unit of alcohol equals
                                                                                                                   half a pint of beer, a small
                             may save a life. These boxes
                                                                         If you have been experiencing             glass of wine or sherry, or one
                             highlight advice that applies in                                                      measure of hard liquor.
                                                                         attacks of vertigo, it is very
                             particular medical circumstances.           important to avoid certain                • The maximum
                                                                         activities that are potentially
                       • Blue information panels tell you                hazardous to you and to
                                                                                                                     recommended limit for men
                                                                                                                     is 3 units a day.
                             how to gather the information
                                                                         other people. You should not
                             you need to answer the questions            climb ladders or steep flights
                                                                                                                   • The maximum
                                                                                                                     recommended limit for
                             in the chart.                               of stairs, operate machinery,

                                                    HEADACHE   85
                                                                         A C T I O N PA N E L S
         ACTION                          ACTION
    CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                         At the end of every pathway you will find a
    Acute glaucoma (a
    painful, rapid rise
                                    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                    Your symptoms may                    possible diagnosis, advice on what to do, and
    in fluid pressure in the        be side effects of the
    eye) is a possibility,          medication.                          whether or not you need to seek medical help.
    particularly if the pain        • Stop taking any over-
    is around your eye.             the-counter medicines                There are five possible levels of attention, ranging
                                    but continue to take
                                    prescribed medication                from DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS, for the most serious
                                    unless advised to stop
                                    by your doctor.                      conditions, to TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES, for minor
                                                                         complaints. It is important to note, however,
       Where is the                                                      that even apparently minor complaints should
         pain?
W
                                      Are you taking                     receive medical attention when they occur in
                                     any medication?
        Over one or                                                      the elderly or in people who are undergoing
        both temples
                                        Medication
                                                                         cancer treatment.
          Elsewhere

                                                                          !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                      No medication

                                                                         Dial 911 or call EMS for          Contact the doctor, day
         ACTION
    CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                      Have you had                       the emergency services.           or night, by telephone.
                                       this type of
    You may have temporal
                                        headache                         If there is a delay in            Dial 911 or call EMS if you
    arteritis (inflammation
h
    of blood vessels in the              before?                         obtaining an ambulance,           fail to make contact within
    head), particularly if
    you are over 50 and                                                  go to the hospital by car.        1 hour.
    are not feeling well.                    Yes

                                             No                           SEE YOUR DOCTOR                   MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                          WITHIN 24 HOURS                   TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR

         ACTION                                                          It is important that the          The condition may require
    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                         ACTION                          symptoms are assessed by          medical treatment, but a
    if you cannot identify
    a possible cause for
                                    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                         a doctor within 24 hours          reasonable delay is unlikely
    your headache from              A recurrent headache
                                    for which there is no
                                                                         of their onset.                   to lead to problems.
    this chart.
                                    obvious cause, such
                                    as drinking too much
                                    alcohol, should always
                                    be investigated fully
                                    by your doctor.                       TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES

                                                                         For minor infections, such as a sore throat or runny
                                                                         nose, use self-help measures, first aid, or over-the-
                                                                         counter remedies to relieve discomfort. Always
                                                                         consult your doctor if you are unsure whether a
                       Possible cause not identified                     remedy is suitable and read the manufacturer’s
                       If your symptoms do not suggest a
                                                                         instructions before taking medication.
                       diagnosis, the chart recommends
                       that you see a doctor.
68    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Assessing symptoms (adults)
      Symptoms take many forms. Some involve a new sensation; others involve
      a change in a normal body function. Certain symptoms can be assessed
      very accurately because they can be measured, for example by taking a
      temperature or a pulse. Others need careful and regular attention to assess
      whether something has changed, such as breast or testes examinations.

      MEASURING BODY TEMPERATURE

     1 Insert thermometer 2 Assess
       • Place a digital thermometer in the
         mouth, with the tip under the
                                                  result
         tongue, and leave it until you hear      • A result above
         it “beep”, indicating that it has          100.4°F (38°C)
         measured the temperature.                  indicates a fever.

      TAKING A PULSE

     1 Find
       •
            pulse
         Place the pads of two fingers
                                               2 Assess
                                                 •
                                                        result
                                                    A rate of around 72 beats per
         on the inside of a person’s                minute is normal for an adult.
         wrist, just below the base                    • Note the quality of the pulse:
         of the thumb.                                    if it is regular or irregular,
       • Press firmly to feel the                            strong or weak.
         throbbing beat of
         the pulse.
       • Count   the number                                    Place the pads of the
         of beats per minute.                                  fingers below the
                                                               victim’s thumb

      CHECKING BREATHING RATE

     1 Count
       •
             breaths
         Watch for chest movement or place
                                               2 Assess
                                                 •
                                                        result
                                                    The normal resting breathing rate
         your hand on the adult’s chest or          is 12–15 breaths per minute.
         back so you can feel the breaths.
                                                  • Note the quality of the person’s
       • Count  the number of breaths he            breathing: if it is fast or slow,
         or she takes in one minute.                easy or labored.
                                                                              ASSESSING SYMPTOMS (ADULTS)                                                     69

 ASSESSING WEIGHT
  Check whether you are
  a healthy weight by using              lb kg                HEIGHT/WEIGHT GRAPH FOR MEN AND WOMEN
                                         210   95
  the graph (right). Trace               200   90
  a vertical line from your              190
                                               85
  height and a horizontal                180
                                               80
                                                                                             OVERWEIGHT
                                                                                              (BMI > 25)
  line from your weight.                 170
                                               75
  The point at which the                 160

                                WEIGHT
                                               70
  lines cross is your body               150
                                               65                                           HEALTHY WEIGHT
  mass index (BMI), which                140
                                                                                              (BMI 20-25)
                                               60
  indicates whether or not               130

                                               55
  you are within a healthy               120

                                               50
  range. Being a healthy                 110
                                                                                             UNDERWEIGHT
                                         100   45
  weight decreases the                                                                         (BMI < 20)
                                         90    40
  risk of cardiovascular                         144 146 148 150 152 154 156 158 160 162 164 166 168 170 172 174 176 178 180 182 184 186 188 190 192 194 cm

  disease and many other                            57   58   59   60   61   62   63   64    65   66   67   68   69   70   71   72   73   74   75   75   in

                                                                                                   HEIGHT
  health problems.

 BREASTS: SELF-EXAMINATION

1 Examine yourself                                                 2 Feel each breast
  in a mirror                                                        •    Lie down with one arm behind
                                                                          your head and firmly press each
  • The best time to check your breasts                                   breast in small circular movements.
    is just after your menstrual period.
                                                                        • Feel around the entire breast,
  • Stand   in front of a mirror and                                      armpit area, and nipple.
    look closely for
    dimpled skin and                                                                  • If you discover
    any changes to                                                                       a lump or any
    your nipple or                                                                       changes, consult
    to the size or                                                                       your doctor.
    shape of your
    breasts.                                                                                                Feel the breast and
                                                                                                            up into the armpit

 TESTES: SELF-EXAMINATION

1 Look for changes                                                 2 Feel
                                                                     •
                                                                          for lumps
                                                                          Feel across the entire surface of
  • The best time to examine your
    testes is just after a bath or shower                                 each testis by rolling it slowly
    when the scrotum is relaxed.                                          between fingers and thumb.
  • Check the skin of your scrotum                                      • Check  for lumps and swellings.
    for changes in appearance.                                          • Consult your doctor immediately
                                                                          if you detect any change in
                                                                          appearance or texture.
70    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Assessing symptoms
      (children)
      When a child is not well, temperature, pulse, and breathing rate are important
      symptoms to assess. To monitor your child’s growth, use the height and weight
      charts (opposite) to assess whether he or she is within normal ranges.

      MEASURING BODY TEMPERATURE

     1 Insert thermometer 2 Assess result
       •                     •
         Place a digital thermometer under             For a mouth or ear reading,
         the tongue (for a child over 7)               a result above 100.4°F (38°C)
         or under the armpit                            indicates a fever.
         and leave it until you                         • For an armpit reading,
         hear it “beep,”                                  a result above 99°F
         indicating that it                               (37.4°C) indicates a fever.
         has measured the
         temperature.
       • Insert the tip
         of an aural
         thermometer
         into the ear. The                                Hold the digital
         reading is taken                                 thermometer securely
         in 1 second.                                     in place

      TAKING A PULSE

     1 Find
       •
            pulse
         For a baby, place two fingers on
                                              2 Assess result
                                                •   Count the number of beats you
         the inner side of the arm, halfway         can feel in one minute.
         between the elbow and
         the armpit.                              • A rate of around 140 beats per
                                                    minute is normal for a baby,
       • For a child, place your                           120 per minute for a
         fingers on the inside                             toddler, and 100 per
         of the wrist, just                                minute for an older child.
         below the base of
         the thumb.                                      • Note the quality of the
                                                           pulse: if it is regular or
                                                           irregular, strong or weak.

                                                            Find a pulse
                                                            on the inside
                                                            of the arm
                                                                                    ASSESSING SYMPTOMS (CHILDREN)                                          71

 CHECKING BREATHING RATE

1 Count• breaths         Place your hand on the
                                                                              2 Assess result
                                                                                •  Compare the child’s breathing rate
                         child’s chest or back so                                  with the maximum rate for his or
                         that you are able to                                      her age shown in the table below.
                         feel the breaths.
                                                                                 • Note the quality of the breathing:
                         • Count the number of                                     if it is fast or slow, easy or labored.
                            breaths he or she takes
                             in 1 minute.
                                                                              AGE                                BREATHS PER MINUTE
                                          Use your hand to                    Under 2 months                     Maximum of 60 breaths
                                          feel how fast the                   2–11 months                        Maximum of 50 breaths
                                          baby is breathing                   1–5 years                          Maximum of 40 breaths
                                                                              Over 5 years                       Maximum of 30 breaths

 ASSESSING HEIGHT AND WEIGHT
  Find your child’s age on the bottom and                                     shows the normal range of growth, and
  follow a vertical line up, then find the                                    the 5th, 50th, and 95th percentile lines
  height or weight on the left and follow a                                   indicate lower, middle, and upper limits
  horizontal line across. Mark the point                                      respectively. If your child’s measurements
  where the lines cross. The shaded band                                      fall outside the band, see your doctor.

    in cm                          BOYS’ HEIGHT                                  in cm                         GIRLS’ HEIGHT
    70   180                                                                     70   180
         170                                                                          170
    65                                             95th percentile               65                                             95th percentile
         160                                                                          160
    60   150                                                                     60   150
    55   140                                                                     55   140
         130                                                                          130
    50                                                                           50             50th percentile
         120           50th percentile                                                120
    45                                                                           45
         110                                                                          110
    40   100
                                                       5th percentile            40   100
                                                                                                                                     5th percentile
    35   90                                                                      35   90
         80                                                                           80
    30                                                                           30
         70                                                                           70
    25   60                                                                      25   60
    20   50                                                                      20   50
         40                                                                           40
               0   1      2    3    4     5   6 7       8    9   10 11   12                 0   1     2    3    4      5   6    7    8    9   10 11   12
                                         AGE (years)                                                                  AGE (years)

    lb kg                          BOYS’ WEIGHT                                  lb kg                         GIRLS’ WEIGHT
        70                                                                           70
   140                                                                          140
         60                                                                           60
   120                                             95th percentile              120                                             95th percentile
         50                                                                           50
   100                                                                          100
         40                                                                           40
   80                                                                           80
         30                                                                           30
   60                                                                           60
                       50th percentile                                                              50th percentile
         20                                                                           20
   40                                                                           40
                                                       5th percentile                                                                5th percentile
   20    10                                                                     20    10

         0                                                                            0
              0    1      2   3     4     5   6    7    8   9    10 11   12                 0   1     2    3    4      5    6   7     8   9   10 11   12
                                         AGE (years)                                                                   AGE (years)
72    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Not feeling well
      There may be times when don’t feel well but are
      unable to pinpoint a precise symptom. This feeling              Do you have
                                                                       any of the
      is commonly caused by the onset of a minor viral                 following?
      illness, psychological pressures, or simply an
      unhealthy lifestyle. You should always consult                     Feeling
      your doctor if the feeling persists because there                 constantly
                                                                         on edge
      may be a more serious underlying problem.
                                                                         Difficulty
                                                                         sleeping
                 Do you have               Have you lost
     START        a fever – a                more than                  Inability to
                temperature of              10 lb (4.5 kg)             concentrate
                 100.4°F (38°C)             over the past              or to make
                  or above?                  10 weeks                    decisions
                                              without
                                           changing your                 None of
                      Fever                                             the above
                                           eating habits?

                    No fever                Lost over 10 lb
                                               (4.5 kg)

                                           Lost under 10 lb
                                              (4.5 kg) or            Are you taking
                                            gained weight           any medication?

                   ACTION                                               Medication
              GO TO ANOTHER CHART
              Fever (adults), p.74 or
              Fever (children), p.76                                  No medication

                                              ACTION
                                         SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                         WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                         There are a number
                                         of possible causes for
                                         rapid weight loss, and         ACTION
          Safe alcohol limits            it is important to see    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
          One unit of alcohol equals     your doctor to rule       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
          half a pint of beer, a small   out potentially serious   Your symptoms may
          glass of wine or sherry, or    conditions such as        be a side effect of the
          one measure of hard liquor.    diabetes mellitus.        medication.
          • The maximum
                                                                   • Stop taking any over-
            recommended limit for                                  the-counter medicines
            men is 3 units a day.                                  but continue to take
          • The maximum                                            prescribed medication
            recommended limit for                                  unless advised to stop
            women is 2 units a day.                                by your doctor.
                                                           NOT FEELING WELL      73

     ACTION                     ACTION                     ACTION
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT        TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES    TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR         Body changes that         You may have a mild
Your symptoms may          occur soon after          digestive upset as a
be due to an anxiety       conception can make       result of infection or
disorder or depression.    you feel unwell.          having eaten something
• Try physical exercise    Symptoms include          that disagrees with you.
or some relaxation         fatigue, feeling faint,   Your symptoms are not
techniques (p.169);        and nausea/vomiting.      likely to be dangerous,
they may help to           • Eat frequent small      but severe diarrhea can
alleviate the symptoms.    meals throughout the      cause dehydration,
                           day rather than a few     particularly in the
                           larger meals. If you      elderly or very young.
                           suffer from morning       • Avoid rich or spicy
                           sickness, eat a snack     foods and drink plenty
                           before getting up.        of clear fluids.
                           • Lie down if you are     CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                           feeling faint or tired.   if you do not feel better
                           • If you are not sure     within 2 days or sooner
                           whether you are           for a child.
   Might you be            pregnant, use a home
    pregnant?              pregnancy test or
                           consult your doctor.

       Possibly
      pregnant

                                                        Do you have
   Not pregnant
                                                         any of the
                            Do you regularly             following?
                                drink more
                                 than the
                              recommended              Loss of appetite
                             limit of alcohol
      Are you              (see box opposite)?          Nausea and/or
   feeling more                                           vomiting
     tired than
       usual?                Within the limit
                                                            Diarrhea

     More tired                 More than
                                 the limit                  None of
                                                           the above
     No change

                                ACTION
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                           ACTION
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
     ACTION
                           for advice about          MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT        reducing the amount       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR         of alcohol you drink.     if you cannot identify
if your fatigue is         Regularly drinking too    a possible cause for
persistent or severe and   much alcohol can          not feeling well from
has no obvious cause.      make you not feel well.   this chart.
74    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Fever (adults)
      For children under 12, see p.76
      Normal temperature varies from one person to              !   High temperature
                                                                    If you are not feeling well,
      another, but if your temperature is 100.4°F (38°C)            you should take your
      or above, you have a fever. Most fevers are due to            temperature every 4 hours.

      infection, but heat exposure or certain drugs can             •  Call your doctor immediately
                                                                       if your temperature rises to
      also raise body temperature. In all cases, follow                102°F (39°C) or above.

      the advice for bringing down a fever (p.164).                 •  Take steps to lower the fever
                                                                       without delay (see Bringing
                                                                       down a fever, p.164).

                                             ACTION
                  Do you have
     START          a rash?             GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                        Rash with fever, p.96
                                                                         Are you having
                       Rash                                                 problems
                                                                           breathing?
                                           Do you have
                      No rash                                              You are short
                                           a headache?
                                                                             of breath

                                              Severe                         Breathing
                  Do you have                headache                        is painful
                   any of the
                                               Mild                          Breathing
                   following?
                                             headache                        is normal
                    Drowsiness
                   or confusion            No headache

                    Dislike of
                   bright light                                              ACTION
                                                                        CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                   Neck pain on                                         You may have a chest
                   bending the                                          infection, such as
                  head forwards            Do you have                  pneumonia.
                                            a cough?                    • Follow the advice
                     None of                                            for bringing down a
                    the above                                           fever (p.164).

                                               Cough

                                             No cough
                    ACTION

             !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
               You may have
             meningitis (infection
                                                                             ACTION
                                                                        GO TO ANOTHER CHART
             inflaming membranes                                        Sore throat, p.103
             around the brain).
                                                     FEVER (ADULTS)    75

Have you been                                    ACTION
 coughing up                               TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
   sputum?                                 You may have a viral
                      ACTION
                                           chest infection, such
                 TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES    as acute bronchitis.
   Sputum        You probably have a       • Follow the advice
                 viral illness, such as    for bringing down a
                 a severe cold or flu.     fever (p.164).
  No sputum      • Follow the advice       • Drink plenty of fluids.
                 for bringing down a
                 fever (p.164).
                                           • If you smoke, stop.
                                           CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                 • Try inhaling steam      if your symptoms
                 from a bowl of hot        worsen or if you are
 Do you have     water (p.165).            no better within 2 days.
 either of the   CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                 if your symptoms
  following?
                 worsen, if you are no
                 better within 2 days,
General aches    or if any other
  and pains      symptoms develop.

 Runny nose

                      ACTION
   Neither
                 SEE YOUR DOCTOR                 ACTION
                 WITHIN 24 HOURS           SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                 You may have cystitis     WITHIN 24 HOURS
                 or a urine infection      A long-term infection,
                 that has spread to one    such as infective
 Do you have     or both kidneys.          endocarditis (inflamed
problems with    • For both conditions,    lining of the heart), or
  urination?     take an analgesic such    an AIDS-related illness
                 as acetaminophen.         may cause recurrent

    Painful
                 • Drink 500 ml (1 pt)     fever. Another possible
                 of fluid every hour for   cause is an underlying
                 4 hours.                  cancer, such as
                 • Drinking cranberry      lymphoma (cancer of
 Abnormally
                 juice may help relieve    the lymphatic system).
  frequent
                 the burning sensation.

   Neither

                    Have you had
                    several bouts
                    of fever over
 Do you have        the past few
a sore throat?         weeks?
                                                 ACTION
  Sore throat      Recurrent fever         SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                           WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                           if you cannot identify a
                       No other            possible cause for your
No sore throat
                     recent fever          fever from this chart.
76    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Fever (children)
          For adults and children over 12, see p.74
      A fever is a temperature of 100.4°F (38°C) or above.        !   Danger signs
                                                                      Dial 911 or call EMS if your
      If your child is not feeling well, you should take his          child’s temperature rises
      or her temperature because a high fever may need                above 102°F (39°C) and he
                                                                      or she has any of the
      urgent treatment. If a feverish child becomes                   following symptoms:
      unresponsive, dial 911 or call EMS. In all cases,               • Abnormally rapid breathing
                                                                        (see p.71).
      follow the advice for bringing down a fever (p.164).
                                                                      • Abnormal drowsiness.
                                                                      • Severe headache.

                                             ACTION                   • Dislike of bright light.
                   How old is                                         • Refusal to drink for more
     START         your child?          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW            than 6 hours.
                                        Fever in young babies
                                        is unusual unless it
                                        occurs within 48 hours
                 Under 6 months         of immunization. Fever
                                        may indicate an illness
                                        that could be serious.
                                                                              Is your child
                     6 months                                                 reluctant to
                      or over                                                   move an
                                                                               arm or leg?

                                                                                    Yes
                    Does your               Does your
                    child have              child have
                     a rash?                any of the                              No
                                            following?
                       Rash
                                              Severe
                                             headache
                      No rash                                                  ACTION
                                             Abnormal
                                                                          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                            drowsiness,
                                                                          Your child could have
                                             irritability,
                                                                          an infection in a bone,
                                            or confusion                  such as osteomyelitis,
                    ACTION                                                or a joint infection.
                                             Dislike of
             GO TO ANOTHER CHART
             Rash with fever, p.96          bright light

                                            Neck pain on
                                            bending the                        ACTION
                                           head forwards                  SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                    ACTION
                                                                          WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                              None of
             !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
               Your child may have
             meningitis.
                                             the above
                                                                          Your child may have
                                                                          acute otitis media
                                                                          (middle-ear infection).
             • Follow the advice                                          • Give liquid acet-
             for bringing down a                                          aminophen to relieve
             fever (p.164).                                               pain and reduce fever.
                                                            FEVER (CHILDREN)      77

       ACTION                  Does your                   ACTION
                               child have
!   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
  Your child could
have a respiratory
                              either of the
                                                     TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                     Your child probably has
                                                     a viral illness, such as a
                               following?
infection, such as                                   severe cold or flu.
pneumonia.                                           • Follow the advice
• Give liquid acet-               Cough              for bringing down a
aminophen to relieve                                 fever (p.164).
pain and reduce fever.                               • Try inhaling steam
                               Runny nose            from a bowl of hot
                                                     water (p.165).
                                                     CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
    Is your child’s                                  if your child’s condition
                                  Neither            worsens, if he or she is
       breathing
                                                     no better within 2 days,
      abnormally                                     or if he or she develops
    noisy or rapid                                   other symptoms.
      (see p.71)?
                                Does your
      Abnormally               child have a
                               sore throat?                ACTION
        rapid
                                                     TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                     Your child may have a
          Noisy                 Sore throat          throat infection, such
                                                     as tonsillitis.
                                                     • Follow the advice
         Neither              No sore throat         for bringing down a
                                                     fever (p.164).
                                                     • Follow the advice
                                                     for soothing a sore
                                                     throat (p.164).
       ACTION
                               Does your             CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                               child have            if your child is no better
This may be croup, in                                in 24 hours or if other
which a viral infection
                              either of the          symptoms develop.
inflames the airways.          following?
• Sit with your child
in a steamy bathroom              Painful
to ease the breathing.           urination                 ACTION
                                                     SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                              Diarrhea with          WITHIN 24 HOURS
                               or without            Your child may have a
    Does either of              vomiting             urinary tract infection.
    the following                                    • Give plenty of fluids
       apply?                                        to drink.
                                  Neither
     Your child has
      been pulling
       at one ear                                          ACTION
                                ACTION               CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
     Your child has                                  if your child is under
                           SEE YOUR DOCTOR
     complained of         WITHIN 24 HOURS           1 year. He or she may
        earache            if you cannot identify    have gastroenteritis.
                           a possible cause for      • Give older children
                           your child’s fever from   plenty of clear fluids
         Neither
                           this chart.               to drink.
78    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Excessive sweating
      Sweating is one of the body’s cooling mechanisms.
      It is a normal response to heat, exercise, and stress      Do you feel
                                                                  otherwise
      or fear. Some people naturally sweat more than                well?
      others. Wearing natural fibers, such as cotton,
      and using an antiperspirant often help to reduce               Well
      sweating. You should consult your doctor if you
      sweat excessively and are unsure of the cause.
                                                                    Unwell

                Do you have                  When does
     START       a fever – a                the sweating
               temperature of                  occur?
                100.4°F (38°C)
                 or above?
                                           Mainly at night

                     Fever                                        ACTION
                                            At other times
                                                              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                   No fever
                                                              Hormonal changes
                                                              associated with the
                                                              menstrual cycle or
                                                              menopause may cause
                                                              excessive sweating.
                                            Do you have
                                             any of the
                  ACTION                     following?

             GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                             Weight loss
             Fever (adults), p.74, or
             Fever (children), p.76         with increased
                                               appetite

                                               Feeling          Does either of
                                              constantly        the following
                                               on edge             apply?

                                             Bulging eyes      Sweating occurs
                  ACTION                                       with menstrual
             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                   periods
             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                None of
             You may be suffering             the above           Menstrual
             from hyperthyroidism                                periods have
             (an overactive thyroid
                                                                    become
             gland). However,
             anxiety disorders                                     irregular
             are another possible
             cause of some of
                                                                    Neither
             these symptoms.
                                                            EXCESSIVE SWEATING         79

      ACTION                       ACTION                     ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES     TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
WITHIN 24 HOURS              Being overweight can       Excessive sweating of
You may have a chronic       lead to excessive          the hands and feet is a
infection, such as           sweating, particularly     common problem.
tuberculosis, or a cancer,   after physical exertion.   • Wash off sweat
such as lymphoma             • Adopt a sensible         regularly and wear
(cancer of the               weight-reducing diet.      socks made from
lymphatic system).                                      natural fibers. Try to
                             • Wash away sweat
                             regularly and wear         go barefoot whenever
                             comfortable loose          possible.
                             clothing made from         CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                             natural fibers.            if your symptoms do
                             CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR        not improve.
  Is your weight             if your symptoms do
    within ideal             not improve.
      limits?

                                                          Is the sweating
     Overweight                                               limited to
                                                            certain parts
                                                            of the body?
    Ideal weight              Do you regularly
                                  drink more
                                   than the                 Mainly hands
    Underweight
                                recommended
                               limit of alcohol
                              (see box below)?               Mainly feet

                                  More than                  Other parts
      ACTION                       the limit                  affected
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
for advice about               Within the limit
reducing the amount
of alcohol you drink.                                         ACTION
                                                        SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                        WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                        if you cannot identify
                                                        a possible cause from
                                  Are you               this chart.
                              currently taking
      ACTION                  any medication?
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                     Safe alcohol limits
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                Medication            One unit of alcohol equals
Your symptoms may                                       half a pint of beer, a small
be a side effect of the                                 glass of wine or sherry, or
medication.                     No medication           one measure of hard liquor.
• Stop taking any over-                                 • The maximum
the-counter medicines                                     recommended limit for
but continue to take                                      men is 3 units a day.
prescribed medication                                   • The maximum
unless advised to stop                                    recommended limit for
by your doctor.                                           women is 2 units a day.
80    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Lumps and swellings
      Enlarged lymph nodes (glands) are often the cause
      of lumps and swellings under the skin, particularly        !   Painless lumps or
                                                                     swellings
      in the neck, under the arms, or in the groin. These            Any painless lump or swelling
      glands usually become swollen due to an infection.             that does not disappear
                                                                     within 2 weeks should be
      The swelling subsides shortly after the infection clears       seen by a doctor. Although
      up. If the lumps are painful or if they are persistent         in most cases the cause is not
                                                                     serious, a painless lump may
      but painless, you should consult your doctor.                  be a sign of cancer. Early
                                                                     treatment can be lifesaving.

               What are the                 Are the lumps
     START     characteristics               or swellings
                of the lump                 in more than
                or swelling?                  one area?

               Red and painful              One area only

                     Other                   Several areas
                                                                           Do you have
                                                                             a rash?

                  ACTION                                                         Rash

             SEE YOUR DOCTOR
             WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                                               No rash
             You may have an
             abscess or a boil.
             • Relieve pain by              Do you have
             putting a clean cloth           a fever – a
             soaked in hot water           temperature of
             on the affected area
             for 30 minutes four
                                            100.4°F (38°C)
             times a day.                    or above?

                                                                             ACTION
                                                 Fever
                                                                       SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                       WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                                       You may be suffering
                  ACTION                       No fever                from infectious
             SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                           mononucleosis,
             WITHIN 24 HOURS                                           especially if you’re
             A viral infection is                                      generally not
             the most likely cause.                                    feeling well.
             Lymphoma (cancer of                                       • Drink plenty of
             the lymphatic system) or                                  cool fluids.
             an AIDS-related illness                                   • Take acetaminophen
             are also possibilities.                                   to reduce your fever.
                                                     LUMPS AND SWELLINGS        81

      ACTION                 What happens                 ACTION
GO TO ANOTHER CHART          to the swelling         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
Testes and scrotum             if you press          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
problems, p.151               on it or if you        You may have a hernia.
                                lie down?

      Where is                 It disappears
    the lump or
     swelling?                   It reduces
                                   in size
         Testis
                                No change                 ACTION
                                                     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
         Groin                                       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                     Lymph nodes in the
                                                     groin often become
        Breast                   ACTION              swollen in response
                                                     to an infection.
                            GO TO ANOTHER CHART
    Sides or back           Breast problems, p.154
       of neck

         Other

                                                          ACTION
                              Do you have a
                               sore throat?          GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                                     Sore throat, p.103
      ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR                 Sore throat
WITHIN 24 HOURS
A number of viral
illnesses can cause
                              No sore throat
swollen glands and a
rash. Lyme disease (an                                    ACTION
infection that causes
a rash and flulike                                   TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
symptoms) is another                                 An injury is likely to
possibility, particularly                            cause some swelling as
if you think you may                                 a result of damage to
                             Do you have a           the tissues. An infected
have been bitten by a
tick recently.
                              recent injury          wound or a rash can
                             near the site of        also cause nearby
                              the swelling?          lymph nodes to swell.
                                                     •Make sure the
                                                     wound is clean and
                                   Injury            protect it with a
      ACTION                                         bandage or dressing.
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                  CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR               No injury           if there is any pain,
if you cannot identify a                             redness, or pus around
possible cause for your                              the wound, or if the
lumps or swellings                                   swelling persists after
from this chart.                                     the wound has healed.
82    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Feeling faint /passing out
      A sensation of dizziness or lightheadedness may
      be followed by passing out (loss of consciousness).          !   Unconsciousness
                                                                       If someone remains
      The cause is usually lack of food or a reduction in              unconscious for more than
      blood flow to the brain. A brief episode of feeling              a minute or so, whatever the
                                                                       suspected cause, you should
      faint without other symptoms is not a cause for                  get emergency medical help.
      alarm, but you should consult your doctor if such                •  If you need to leave the
                                                                          person to call for help,
      episodes recur or if you have passed out.                           first lay him or her in the
                                                                          recovery position (pp.14–15).
                                                                       •  Do not move the person
                 Have you had                 Have you                    if you suspect spinal injury.

     START        any of the                noticed any of
                  following?                the following?

                                              Bloodstained
                 Disturbed vision
                                                 vomit                          Did any of the
                                                                               following occur
                    Numbness,                 Red blood in                        when you
                    weakness,                   the feces
                                                                                 passed out?
                    or tingling
                                               Black, tarry
                                                  feces                         You twitched
                    Confusion                                                   uncontrollably
                                                None of
                                               the above                         You bit your
                     Difficulty
                                                                                   tongue
                     speaking

                     None of                                                    You urinated
                    the above

                                               ACTION                              None of
                                                                                  the above
                 Are any of the         !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                          You may have some
                                        bleeding within the
                 symptoms still
                    present?            digestive tract, perhaps
                                        from a stomach ulcer
                                        (an eroded area of the
                    Symptoms            stomach lining) or
                     present            from an inflammation
                                        in the colon.
                   Symptoms no
                                                                                  ACTION
                  longer present

                                                                           !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                             if this is your first
                                                                           attack. You may have
                                                                           had a seizure, possibly
                    ACTION                     ACTION                      due to epilepsy.

             !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
               You may have had
             a stroke.
                                        CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                        You may have had
                                        a mini-stroke.
                                                                           CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                           if you have had
                                                                           previous similar attacks.
                                                FEELING FAINT / PASSING OUT    83

      ACTION                Does either of                ACTION
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES      the following            CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
Sudden shock can lead          apply?                Low blood sugar (which
to feeling faint or even                             may be due to excessive
passing out.                   You have              insulin treatment)
• Rest and ask someone                               could be the cause.
                               diabetes
to stay with you until                               • Eat or drink
you feel better.                                     something sugary now.
                              You had not
• Follow the first-aid      eaten for several
advice for treating
fainting (p.53)
                              hours before
                               passing out                ACTION
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
if it happens again.
                                                     SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                Neither              WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                     You may be anemic.
                                                     This can be confirmed
   Did you feel                                      by a blood test.
 faint or pass out
   immediately               Do you have
  after either of             any of the
                              following?                  ACTION
  the following?
                                                     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT

      Emotional                Shortness             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                               of breath             Fainting is common in
        shock                                        early pregnancy. If you
                               Paler skin            are not sure whether
     Getting up                                      you are pregnant, do a
      suddenly                than normal
                                                     home pregnancy test.
                               Inordinate
       Neither                   fatigue

                                None of                 Might you be
                               the above                 pregnant?
      ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                             Possibly
WITHIN 24 HOURS                                            pregnant
if you passed out, or in    Does either of
the next few days even      the following
if you did not pass out.       apply?                   Not pregnant
The most likely cause
is a temporary drop in
                             You have had
blood pressure due to
a change in position.        chest pain or
                              you have a                  ACTION
                            heart condition          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                     if you passed out
                             You have had            and cannot identify
      ACTION                  palpitations           a possible cause from
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                 this chart.
You may have low                                     SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                Neither
blood pressure due to                                WITHIN 24 HOURS
an irregular heartbeat                               if you cannot identify
or worsening of an                                   a possible cause for
existing heart condition.                            feeling faint.
84    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Headache
      Fever and tension in head and neck muscles are
      common causes of headache. Too much alcohol,                !   Danger signs
                                                                      Dial 911 or call EMS if a
      caffeine, or nicotine may also cause headache. Most             headache is accompanied
      headaches do not last for more than a few hours. If             by any of the following
                                                                      symptoms:
      your headache lasts for more than 24 hours, is not
                                                                      • Drowsiness or confusion.
      improved by over-the-counter analgesics, or recurs              • Weakness of a limb.
      several times in a week, consult your doctor.                   • Blurred vision.
                                                                      • Dislike of bright light.
                                                                      • Temporary unconsciousness.

                  Have you hit             Do you have
     START         your head                a fever – a
                 within the past          temperature of
                   24 hours?               100.4°F (38°C)
                                            or above?
                                                                               ACTION
                   Head injury                                            GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                                 Fever                    Fever (adults), p.74, or
                                                                          Fever (children), p.76
                 No head injury
                                               No fever

                                              ACTION                          Have you
                    Are danger          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES               experienced
                  signs present         A mild headache is                  nausea and/or
                 (see box above         common following a                  vomiting with
                  right) or have        minor head injury.
                                                                            the headache?
                  you vomited?          • Take an analgesic
                                        (not aspirin).
                                        CALL YOUR DOCTOR                            Yes
                   Danger signs
                                        IMMEDIATELY
                     present            if your headache lasts
                                        for more than 2 hours
                  Vomited after         or if you develop other
                                                                                    No
                   head injury          symptoms.

                 No danger signs
                   or vomiting
                                              ACTION
                                        TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                        Sinusitis is the likely
                                        cause of your headache.
                    ACTION              • Try inhaling steam
                                        from a bowl of hot
                                        water (p.165).
             !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
               There may be damage
             to the tissues that
                                        CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                        if you feel no better
             surround the brain.        within 2 days.
                                                                      HEADACHE   85

                                ACTION                     ACTION
    How is your
      vision?              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW       MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           Acute glaucoma (a          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                           painful, rapid rise        Your symptoms may
                           in fluid pressure in the   be side effects of the
   Blurred vision          eye) is a possibility,     medication.
                           particularly if the pain   • Stop taking any over-
                           is around your eye.        the-counter medicines
    Disturbed in
                                                      but continue to take
    other ways
                                                      prescribed medication
                                                      unless advised to stop
     Unchanged                                        by your doctor.

     ACTION                   Where is the
                                pain?
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                        Are you taking
You have probably a
migraine, particularly
                                                       any medication?
                               Over one or
if any visual problems         both temples
occurred before the
headache. However,                                        Medication
the slight chance of a           Elsewhere
more serious disorder,
such as a stroke, needs
to be ruled out if this
                                                        No medication
is your first migraine.
• Take an analgesic
and sips of water.
• Rest in a darkened,
quiet room until the            ACTION
pain subsides.                                          Have you had
                           CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
If you have had any                                      this type of
                           You may have temporal
previous attacks, try      arteritis (inflammation        headache
to identify and avoid      of blood vessels in the         before?
potential triggers, such   head), particularly if
as chocolate.              you are over 50 and
                           are not feeling well.               Yes

  Does either of
                                                               No
  the following
     apply?

   The pain is felt             ACTION
    chiefly in the
  areas above and
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT             ACTION
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   below the eyes          if you cannot identify     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           a possible cause for       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
 You have recently         your headache from         A recurrent headache
  had a runny or           this chart.                for which there is no
    stuffy nose                                       obvious cause, such
                                                      as drinking too much
                                                      alcohol, should always
       Neither                                        be investigated fully
                                                      by your doctor.
86    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Vertigo
      The unpleasant sensation that your surroundings
      are moving around you is known as vertigo. It is           !   Recurring attacks
                                                                     of vertigo
      often associated with nausea and vomiting. Healthy             If you have been experiencing
      people may experience vertigo temporarily after a              attacks of vertigo, it is very
                                                                     important to avoid certain
      ride at an amusement park or after drinking too                activities that are potentially
      much alcohol. You should consult your doctor if                hazardous to you and others.
                                                                     You should not climb ladders
      you develop vertigo for no obvious reason.                     or steep flights of stairs,
                                                                     operate machinery, or drive
                                                                     until the cause of your
                                                                     symptoms has been
              Have you had                Have you                   diagnosed and treated.
     START     any of the              noticed either of
               following?               the following?

                Numbness,
                                            Hearing loss
                tingling, or
                 weakness
                                             Ringing in
                                              the ears
             Disturbed vision                                                 Have you
                                                                            experienced
                                               Neither
                                                                            either of the
                Confusion
                                                                             following?

                 Difficulty                                                   Nausea or
                 speaking                                                     vomiting
                 None of                                                      Difficulty
                the above                                                   keeping your
                                                                              balance

                                             ACTION
                                                                                Neither
                                      !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                        You may have had
                                      a stroke.

             Are any of these
                                                                              ACTION
              symptoms still
                 present?                                              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                         You may have had a
                                                                       stroke. Your symptoms
                                                                       may also be caused by
                Symptoms                                               labyrinthitis (inflamed
                 present                                               inner ear).

               Symptoms no
                                                                       • You can minimize
                                                                       the symptoms of
              longer present                 ACTION
                                                                       labyrinthitis by lying
                                      CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW             down or trying to
                                      You may have had a               move around as little
                                      mini-stroke.                     as possible.
                                                                            VERTIGO   87

      ACTION                                                 ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                        TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
WITHIN 24 HOURS                                        Your symptoms are
You could be suffering                                 most likely to be
from Ménière’s disease                                 caused by drinking
(a disorder of the inner         ACTION                more alcohol than
ear, which contains         CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW       usual or drinking on
the organs of balance       Your symptoms may          an empty stomach.
and hearing).               be a side effect of your   • The effects of
• Lie still in a darkened   medication.                alcohol should wear
room with your eyes                                    off within a few hours.
closed and avoid noise.
                            • Stop taking any over-
                            the-counter medicines      • Meanwhile, drink
Acoustic neuroma            but continue to take       plenty of water.
(a noncancerous tumor       prescribed medication      CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
of the nerve that           unless advised to stop     if the sensation persists
connects the ear to the     by your doctor.            for more than 12 hours.
brain) is another,
although less likely,
possibility.

                                 Have you
     Are you                   been drinking
 currently taking                alcohol?
 any medication?
                                     Yes
                                                             How old
     Medication
                                                             are you?
                                      No
   No medication
                                                             50 or over

                                                             Under 50

      ACTION                   Does turning
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT           or raising your
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR            head bring on
Your vertigo may be               vertigo?
caused by osteoarthritis
affecting the bones
and cartilage of the             Brings on
upper spine (cervical             vertigo
spondylosis). This can
cause pressure on the          No noticeable
blood vessels of the              effect                     ACTION
areas of the brain that                                SEE YOUR DOCTOR
affect balance.                                        WITHIN 24 HOURS
•Try to avoid making                                   if you cannot identify a
any sudden or extreme                                  possible cause for your
head movements.                                        vertigo from this chart.
88    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Numbness and/or tingling
      Almost everyone has experienced numbness, the
      loss of sensation in a part of the body, after sitting         !   Danger signs
                                                                         Dial 911 or call EMS if the
      or lying in an awkward position for some time.                     numbness and/or tingling is
      Tingling, a prickly feeling, often occurs as sensation             accompanied by any of the
                                                                         following symptoms:
      returns to a numb area. You should consult this
                                                                         • Feeling faint or passing out.
      chart if you experience numbness and/or tingling                   • Disturbed vision.
      for which there is no obvious cause.                               • Confusion.
                                                                         • Difficulty speaking.
                                                                         • Weakness in a limb.

                   Did the                     ACTION
     START        numbness               TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                    and/or               Pressure on nerves or
               tingling occur            on the blood vessels
                 in either of            that supply them is
                                         the most likely cause.                Does either of
               the following
              circumstances?             • Change position and                 the following
                                         massage the affected
                                         area. Normal sensation
                                                                                  apply?
                After sitting            should return within a
              in one position            few minutes.                         Numbness and/or
              for a long time            CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR                  tingling is worse
                                         if the numbness or                       at night
                On waking                tingling feeling persists
                                         for longer than 1 hour.                  Pain shoots
                  from a
                deep sleep                                                         into palm
                                                                                    of hand
                  Neither
                                                                                    Neither
                                              Have you
                                             noticed any
                                             stiffness in
                                             your neck?

                                             No stiff neck

                                               Stiff neck                          ACTION
              Where is the                                                   MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
               numbness                                                      TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                             You may have cervical
             and/or tingling?
                                                                             spondylosis (a type of
                                                                             osteoarthritis that
                                                                             affects the upper spine).
               Hand or arm

                 Elsewhere
                                                     NUMBNESS AND/OR TINGLNG        89

     ACTION                 Have you had                        ACTION
                             any of the
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
You probably have
                              following                  !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                           You may have had
                                                         a stroke.
                             symptoms?
carpal tunnel syndrome
(tingling and pain in
                             Feeling faint
the hand and forearm
due to a compressed         or passing out
nerve at the wrist).
• Avoid positions that     Disturbed vision
worsen the symptoms.
                                                                 Are any
                                                                 of these
                               Confusion
                                                               symptoms
                                                              still present?
                               Difficulty
                               speaking                         Symptoms
                                                                 present
                               Weakness
                               in a limb                       Symptoms no
                                                              longer present
 Are the affected               None of
  areas on only                the above
   one side of
    the body?

   One side only          Do your fingers
                           become numb
                            and white or                        ACTION
     Both sides
                            blue in either
                                                         CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                          of the following
                                                         You may have had a
                           circumstances?                mini-stroke.

                           In cold weather

                             When using
     ACTION                   vibrating
                             machinery
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
This type of numbness           Neither                         ACTION
is most likely caused                                    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
by hand–arm                                              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
syndrome, which is                                       You may be suffering
associated with the                                      from Raynaud’s
long-term use of                                         phenomenon, in which
vibrating machinery.           ACTION                    there is intermittent
• Avoid using            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT             narrowing of blood
vibrating machinery.                                     vessels in the hands or,
                         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
• Keep warm.             if you cannot identify          rarely, the feet.
• If you smoke, stop.    a possible cause for            • Keep your hands
                         your numbness and/or            and/or feet warm.
                         tingling from this chart.       • If you smoke, stop.
90   FAMILY ILLNESS

     Facial pain
     Pain in the face may be sharp and stabbing or dull
     and throbbing, and is most often caused by an                  Do any of the
                                                                     following
     inflammation of structures in the face, such as the               apply?
     sinuses or teeth. Facial pain is usually short-lived,
     but some types, such as neuralgia, may persist.                Your scalp is
                                                                  sensitive to touch
     Consult your doctor if the pain is persistent,
     unexplained, or is not relieved by analgesics.                 You don’t feel
                                                                        well

                                                                    Pain comes on
             Where is                       ACTION                  when chewing
START        the pain?
                                      GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                      Eye pain or                       None of
                                      irritation, p.98                 the above
            Over one or
            both temples

            In or around                    ACTION
               the eye
                                      CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW             ACTION
                                      You may have temporal      TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
             Elsewhere                arteritis (inflammation    You probably have
                                      of blood vessels around    sinusitis, especially if
                                      the head), especially if   you have recently had
                                      you are over 50.           a cold and both sides of
                                                                 your face are affected.
             ACTION                                              If only one side is
        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                      affected, a dental
        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR               Which of the            problem, such as an
        You may have                      following              abscess, is more likely.
        trigeminal neuralgia               describes             • Take an analgesic
        (severe pain due to                                      such as acetaminophen.
                                          your pain?
        an irritated nerve).                                     • Try inhaling steam
        • Try to avoid triggers                                  from a bowl of hot
        if possible.                    Stabbing pain            water (p.165) if you
                                                                 think you have sinusitis.
                                        when touching
                                                                 CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                          the face or
                                                                 OR DENTIST
                                           chewing               if you do not feel
             ACTION
                                                                 better within 2 days.
        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT              Aching pain
        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                on chewing
        OR DENTIST                      and/or yawning
        You may have a
        disorder in the joint
        between the jaw and                Dull aching                 ACTION
        the skull.                         around one
                                             or both             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
        • Take acetaminophen                                     TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
        to relieve the pain.               cheekbones
                                                                 if you cannot identify
        • Hold a wrapped                                         a possible cause for
        heating pad against the              None of             your facial pain from
        affected area.                      the above            this chart.
                                                 FACIAL PAIN • DIFFICULTY SPEAKING       91

   Difficulty speaking
   Slurred or unclear speech and the inability to find
                                                                     ACTION
   or use words are symptoms that may have an
   obvious cause, such as drinking too much alcohol.
   But difficulty speaking can also signal a more
                                                              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                 You may have had
                                                               a stroke.
   serious condition affecting the brain’s speech
   centers. If your speech suddenly deteriorates,
   consult your doctor urgently.

                                                                     ACTION
          Have you had                  Are any
                                                               CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
START      any of the                 symptoms
                                                               You may have had a
           following?                still present?            mini-stroke.

                                       Symptoms
          Disturbed vision
                                        present

            Numbness,                 Symptoms no
            tingling, or             longer present
             weakness                                                ACTION
                                                               SEE YOUR DOCTOR
            Feeling faint              ACTION                  WITHIN 24 HOURS
           or passing out                                      Your symptoms may
                                  CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW         be a side effect of
                                  You may have a type          medication or drugs.
             Confusion            of facial palsy, due to
                                  damaged facial nerves.
                                                               • Stop taking any over-
                                                               the-counter medicines
             Inability to
                                  •Take care of your           but continue to take
                                  eyes, which may not          prescribed medication
              move the            close fully.                 unless advised to stop
          muscles on one                                       by your doctor.
          side of the face

              None of                 Do any of
             the above               these apply?
                                                                     ACTION
                                                               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                    You have been              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
             ACTION                 taking drugs or            for advice on reducing
        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT           medication               your alcohol intake.
        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
        You may have glossitis       You have been
        (inflamed tongue).          drinking alcohol
        • Rinse your mouth                                           ACTION
        regularly with either
        a salt solution or a           You have a
                                                               SEE YOUR DOCTOR
        pain-relieving                 sore mouth
                                                               WITHIN 24 HOURS
        mouthwash.                      or tongue              if you cannot identify
        • Avoid acidic and                                     a possible cause for
        spicy foods.                    None of                your speech difficulty
        • If you smoke, stop.          the above               from this chart.
92    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Forgetfulness or confusion
      Most people are forgetful sometimes, especially
      if they are very busy. Absent-mindedness is also        !   Sudden onset of
                                                                  confusion
      a natural part of the aging process. Confusion is           Call a doctor immediately if
      the inability to think clearly and may include              a person suddenly becomes
                                                                  very confused or disoriented
      forgetfulness. You should consult your doctor if            about time or place, or seems
      episodes of forgetfulness and/or confusion occur            to be seeing or hearing
                                                                  things that are not there.
      frequently or are severe enough to disrupt your life.

                  Has the                  Have you had                  Do you have
     START     forgetfulness                any of the                    a fever – a
                   and/or                   following?                  temperature of
                 confusion                                               100.4°F (38°C)
               come on since                                              or above?
                                          Disturbed vision
               a head injury?

                                            Numbness,                         Fever
                 Head injury                tingling, or
                                             weakness
                                                                            No fever
               No head injury              Vertigo or loss
                                          of consciousness

                                             Difficulty
                                             speaking
                                                                           ACTION
                                              None of
                                                                    CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                             the above
                                                                    Fever, especially a
                  ACTION                                            temperature that is over
             CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                   102°F (39°C), may
             Damage to the brain,                                   itself be a cause of
             such as that resulting                                 confusion. However,
             from a hard blow, may                                  confusion can also be
             cause such symptoms.                                   due to a number of
             In some cases, the                                     serious conditions,
             effects may be delayed.                                such as pneumonia.
                                         Are any of these           • Follow the advice
                                          symptoms still            for bringing down a
                                             present?               fever (p.164).

                                             Symptoms
                                              present

                                            Symptoms no
                  ACTION                   longer present                  ACTION
             CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
             You may have had a
             mini-stroke.
                                                                    !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                      You may have had
                                                                    a stroke.
                                                 FORGETFULNESS OR CONFUSION        93

  Do you suffer                                              ACTION
   from any of                                          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
  the following?               ACTION                   Confusion may indicate
                                                        low or very high blood
                          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
      Diabetes                                          sugar levels in someone
                          Lack of oxygen to             with diabetes.
      mellitus            the brain caused by
                          the worsening of an            • Eat or drink
                                                         something sugary now.
                          existing heart or
   Heart disease
                          lung disease may
                          cause confusion.

    Lung disease

      None of
     the above
                                                             ACTION
                           Have you been
                           drinking alcohol             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           within the past              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                        for advice about
                             few hours?
                                                        reducing the amount
                                                        of alcohol you drink.
                                                        Drinking too much
                                   Yes
                                                        alcohol can cause
                                                        confusion and, more
                                                        seriously, can also lead
     Are you                       No                   to loss of memory.
 currently taking
 any medication?

    Medication
                              Is gradually
                               increasing                    ACTION
   No medication            forgetfulness
                                                        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                            and confusion
                                                        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                             in an elderly
                                                        These symptoms may
                                 person                 indicate a decline in
                            accompanied                 mental function due
                            by any of the               to a condition such as
                               following?               dementia. Depression
                                                        may also cause
     ACTION                                             similar symptoms.
                              Personality
SEE YOUR DOCTOR                 change
WITHIN 24 HOURS
Your symptoms may              Reduced
be a side effect of          attention to
medication or drugs.
                           personal hygiene
• Stop taking any over-                                      ACTION
the-counter medicines
but continue to take           Inability
                                                        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
prescribed medication         to manage
                                                        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
unless advised to stop         everyday                 if you cannot identify
by your doctor.                problems                 a possible cause for
                                                        your forgetfulness
                                None of                 and/or confusion from
                               the above                this chart.
94    FAMILY ILLNESS

      General skin problems
      Skin problems are often caused by local infection,
                                                                   ACTION
      allergy, or irritation. They are usually not serious,
                                                              GO TO ANOTHER CHART
      although widespread skin problems may be distressing.   Rash with fever, p.96
      You should consult your doctor if: a skin problem
      lasts more than a month or causes severe discomfort;
      a new lump appears, especially if it is dark-colored;     Is the affected
      or a sore fails to heal.                                     skin itchy?

                What type of              Do you have                  Itchy
     START      skin problem               a fever – a
                do you have?             temperature of
                                          100.4°F (38°C)            Not itchy
                                           or above?
                     Rash

                  Other skin                  Fever             What does the
                   problem                                      area look like?
                                            No fever
                                                                Painful, blistery
                                                                rash in one area

                                                                  Reddened
                                                               patches covered
                                                               with silvery scales

                                                                Blistery, oozing
                  ACTION                                           rash on or
                                           Have you
             SEE YOUR DOCTOR             noticed any of         around the lips
             WITHIN 24 HOURS             the following?
             You may have cellulitis                             A painful red
             (infection of the skin                               lump with a
             and underlying tissue).     Red, tender, and
                                                                 yellow center
                                         hot area of skin
                                                                     None of
                                          New mole or a             the above
                                           change in an
                                          existing mole

                                        An open sore that          ACTION
                                         has not healed       TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                          after 3 weeks       This may be a boil.
                  ACTION                                      • Apply a hot cloth for
                                             None of          30 mins, 4 times a day.
             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT            the above         CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                               if the condition has not
             You may possibly have                            improved in 24 hours.
             skin cancer.
                                                     GENERAL SKIN PROBLEMS          95

  What does the              What do the                     ACTION
  affected skin              edges of the              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
    look like?              rash look like?            You may have a form
                                                       of eczema.
 Areas of inflamed            Merge into               • Follow the advice
  skin with a scaly        surrounding skin            for relieving itchiness
       surface                                         (p.165).
                            Clearly defined            CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                               margins                 if your rash does not
 One or more red
                                                       improve within 1
   bumps with a                                        week or if any other
 central dark spot                                     symptoms develop.
                               ACTION
    Intermittent          MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     red raised           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   areas (wheals)         You may have a fungal
                                                             ACTION
                          infection like ringworm.     SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      None of                                          WITHIN 24 HOURS
     the above                                         You may have Lyme
                                                       disease, which is
                               ACTION
                                                       carried by ticks.
                          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
     ACTION               You may have been
                          bitten by an insect.
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES                                       ACTION
You may have urticaria.   • Try using an
                          antihistamine cream.         CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
• Soothe the irritation                                Your symptoms may be
with cold compresses
                                                       a side effect of the drug.
or calamine lotion.
• Try over-the-counter      Does either of             • Stop taking any over-
                                                       the-counter medicines
antihistamine tablets.      the following              but continue to take
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW           apply?                  prescribed medication
if you are experiencing                                unless advised to stop
breathing difficulties.                                by your doctor.
                            You have a rash
                              that spreads
                               out from a
     ACTION                 central red spot                Are you
SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                        currently taking
                            You have been
WITHIN 24 HOURS                                         any medication?
                            bitten by a tick
You may have shingles.
• Soothe the irritation                                     Medication
with cold compresses             Neither
or calamine lotion.
• Take an analgesic                                       No medication
such as acetaminophen.
                               ACTION
                          SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                          WITHIN 24 HOURS
     ACTION               You may have impetigo.             ACTION
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT       • Do not touch blisters.     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR        If you have had the          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
You may have psoriasis.   same problem before,         if you cannot identify
                          it could be a cold sore.     a possible cause for
                          • Use an over-the-           your skin problem
                          counter antiviral cream.     from this chart.
96    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Rash with fever
          For rash without fever, see p.94
      If you or your child has a temperature of 100.4°F            !   Danger signs
                                                                       Dial 911 or call EMS if a rash
      (38°C) or above, you should check whether a rash                 and fever are accompanied
      is also present. A rash with fever is usually caused             by any of the following:

      by a viral infection, most of which are not serious.             • Abnormal drowsiness.
                                                                       • Seizures.
      However, a rash may alert you to the possibility                 • Temperature of 102°F
      of potentially life-threatening meningitis.                        (39°C) or above.
                                                                       • Abnormally rapid breathing
                                                                         (see advice on checking your
                                                                         child’s breathing rate, p.71).
                What are the                  ACTION
               features of the
                                                                       • Noisy or difficult breathing.
     START                               SEE YOUR DOCTOR               • Severe headache.
                    rash?                WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                         You may have
              Widespread itchy,          chickenpox, which
                blistery rash            may need treatment                     ACTION
                                         with an antiviral drug.
                                                                           SEE YOUR DOCTOR
             Rash that spreads           • Follow the advice               WITHIN 24 HOURS
              from a central             for bringing down a               You may have Lyme
                                         fever (p.164).                    disease (an infection
                 red spot
                                         • Apply calamine                  transmitted by ticks
                                         lotion to relieve the             that causes a rash and
                Flat, dark red                                             flulike symptoms).
                                         itchiness of the rash.
                spots that do
               not fade when
                                                                           • Follow the advice
                                                                           for bringing down a
                   pressed                                                 fever (p.164).

                Dull red spots
                 or blotches
               that fade when
                   pressed

               Bright red rash,                                                 ACTION
                 particularly                 ACTION                       SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                on the cheeks                                              WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                         SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                         WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                                           You may have rubella
              Pale pink rash on                                            (German measles).
                                         Fifth disease (or
              trunk and/or face          slapped cheek disease)            Roseola infantum
                                         due to a parvovirus               (a viral infection that
                   None of               infection may be the              causes high fever
                  the above              cause in a child.                 followed by a rash of
                                                                           tiny pink spots) is
                                         • Follow the advice               another possibility,
                                         for bringing down a
                                                                           particularly in children
                                         fever (p.164).
                  ACTION                                                   under 4 years old.
             SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                               • Follow the advice
             WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                                           for bringing down a
             if you cannot identify                                        fever (p.164).
             a possible cause for                                          • Warn any contact
             your rash and fever                                           you think could
             from this chart.                                              be pregnant.
                                                       RASH WITH FEVER          97

 Do you have              ACTION             Checking a red rash
  any of the                                 If you develop a dark red rash,
  following?      !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                    You may have
                  meningitis (inflamed
                                             check if it fades on pressure by
                                             pressing the side of a drinking
                                             glass onto it. If the rash is
    Severe        membranes around           visible through the glass, it
                  the brain).                may be a form of purpura, a
   headache
                                             rash caused by bleeding from
                                             tiny blood vessels in the skin
   Drowsiness                                either because blood vessels
  or confusion                               are damaged or because of
                                             an abnormality in the blood.
   Dislike of             ACTION             Purpura can be caused by one
  bright light                               of several serious disorders,
                  CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW       including meningitis, and needs
                  This type of rash may      prompt medical attention. Dial
Neck pain when    be due to a severe         911 or call EMS if you have a
 bending head     allergic reaction to a     high fever, severe headache,
   forward        drug such as penicillin.   or any of the other danger
                  It could also be the       signs listed opposite.
   Nausea or      result of a blood
   vomiting       disorder that causes
                  bleeding into the skin.
    None of       • Stop taking any over-
   the above      the-counter medicines
                  but continue to take
                  prescribed medication
                  unless advised to stop
                  by your doctor.

                                                      ACTION
    Have you                                   SEE YOUR DOCTOR
 noticed any of                                WITHIN 24 HOURS
  the following                                You may have measles,
symptoms in the         Do you have            which is a potentially
                                               serious illness.
 past few days?           a severe
                        sore throat?           • Follow the advice
                                               for bringing down a
                                               fever (p.164).
  Runny nose
                              Yes

    Cough
                              No

   Red eyes
                                                      ACTION
    None of
                                               SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   the above              ACTION               WITHIN 24 HOURS
                  SEE YOUR DOCTOR              You may have a viral
                  WITHIN 24 HOURS              illness, but scarlet
                  if you cannot identify       fever is a possibility.
                  a possible cause for         • Follow the advice
                  your rash and fever          for bringing down a
                  from this chart.             fever (p.164).
98    FAMILY ILLNESS

      Eye pain or irritation
      Injury, infection, and allergy are the most common
      causes of discomfort or irritation of the eye and              !   Contact lens wearers
                                                                         If you wear contact lenses
      eyelids. A painless red area in the white of the eye is            and experience any kind of
      likely to be a burst blood vessel and should clear up              eye pain or irritation:

      without treatment. However, you should see your                    •  Remove your lenses
                                                                            without delay.
      doctor if your eyes are sore. Consult your doctor                  •  Do not use them again
                                                                            until the problem has been
      immediately if your vision deteriorates.                              identified and treated. If the
                                                                            pain is caused by grit under
                                                                            the lens, there is a risk that
               Does either of                  ACTION                       the cornea will be scratched.

     START     the following              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                                         •  Make an appointment to
                                                                            see your ophthalmologist.
                  apply?                  A foreign object in
                                          your eye is likely to
                  You have                cause pain and redness.
                something in              • Follow the first-aid
                                          advice for dealing with
                  your eye
                                          a foreign object in the                     What is
                                          eye (p.36).                                the main
                   You have
                                          SEEK EMERGENCY HELP                       symptom?
               injured your eye           AT THE HOSPITAL
                                          if a foreign object is
                                          embedded in the eye.                      Pain in and
                    Neither                                                       around the eye

                                                                                      Itching or
                                                                                    irritation of
                                                                                     the eyelid
               Has your vision
                deteriorated                                                        Tender red
              since the injury?                ACTION                              lump on the
                                                                                      eyelid
                                          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                      Yes                 You may have a stye
                                          (infected hair follicle)
                                                                                      The eye
                                          or a chalazion (infected                  feels gritty
                                          gland in the eyelid).
                      No                                                              None of
                                          • Hold a clean, warm,                      the above
                                          damp cloth on the
                                          eyelid for 20 minutes
                                          several times a day.
                                          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                          if your eye does not
                  ACTION                  improve within 3 days.
             CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                                                     ACTION
             Your pain may be
             caused by a minor eye
             injury.
                                                                             !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                               A serious eye injury
                                                                             is possible. Expert
             • Follow the first-aid                                          help may be needed
             advice for dealing with                                         to prevent permanent
             eye wounds (p.35).                                              damage to the eye.
                                                      EYE PAIN OR IRRITATION      99

                                                            ACTION
   Is your vision
                                                       MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
      blurred?
                                                       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                       Entropion (turning
                              Is your eyelid           inward of the upper or
       Blurred               turned inward             lower eyelid, or both)
                               or outward?             is a possible cause of
                                                       your symptoms.
    Not blurred               Eyelid turned
                                 inward

                              Eyelid turned
                                outward                     ACTION
                                                       MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     ACTION                                            TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                             Appears normal
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                   Ectropion (turning out
You may have acute                                     of the lower eyelid) is
glaucoma (painful,                                     a possible cause of
rapid rise in fluid                                    your symptoms.
pressure in the eye),
which could damage
                                ACTION
vision permanently.
                           SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                           WITHIN 24 HOURS
                           You may have so-called           ACTION
                           cluster headaches or        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           uveitis (inflammation       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
     ACTION                of the iris), especially    You probably have
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                           if the eye is red and/      conjunctivitis (inflamed
You may have               or watery.                  membrane covering
blepharitis (inflamed      • Take an analgesic         the eye).
                           such as acetaminophen
eyelid), especially if
                           to relieve symptoms.
                                                       • Wipe the discharge
the skin is scaly and                                  away from your eye
inflamed.                  • Rest in a quiet,          with clean, moist
• Relieve symptoms by      darkened room.              cotton.
holding a warm, damp                                   • Use artificial tears,
cloth on the eyelid.                                   available over the
• If you have dandruff                                 counter, to relieve
too, using an antifungal                               symptoms.
shampoo will improve
                               Is there any
both conditions.
                             discharge from
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
if self-help measures            the eye?
do not help.
                                  Watery                    ACTION
                                 discharge             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                       You may have
                             Sticky discharge
                                                       keratoconjunctivitis
     ACTION                                            sicca (dry eye), in
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                    which the eye fails to
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                               No discharge            produce enough tears.
if you cannot identify a                               • Use artificial tears,
possible cause for your                                available over the
eye pain or irritation                                 counter, to relieve
from this chart.                                       symptoms.
100    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Disturbed/impaired vision
       Visual disturbances might include blurred vision or
                                                                         ACTION
       seeing double. You may also see flashing lights or
       floating spots. These disturbances may be caused by
       a problem in one or both eyes or by damage to the
                                                                  !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                    You may have
                                                                  damaged the part
                                                                  of the brain that is
       areas in the brain that process visual information.        responsible for vision.
       If your vision deteriorates suddenly, you should
       consult your doctor immediately.
                                                                  Have you injured
                                             ACTION               your head in the
                 Do you have
                                                                   past 48 hours?
      START       pain in the           GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                 affected eye?          Eye pain or irritation,
                                                                        Recent head
                                        p.98
                                                                           injury
                       Pain
                                                                       No head injury
                    No pain

                                          How long has
                                                                         ACTION
                                            your vision
                                          been disturbed          MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                           or impaired?           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                  A cataract (clouding of
                                                                  the lens of the eye) can
                                              Less than           cause blurred vision in
                                              24 hours            older people.
                 Do you have
                  diabetes?
                                              24 hours
                                              or longer
                                                                        What kind
                       Yes
                                                                         of visual
                                                                      disturbance or
                       No
                                                                       impairment
                                                                      have you been
                                                                      experiencing?
                                              How old
                                              are you?
                                                                       Blurred vision

                                             50 or over                  Increasing
                   ACTION
                                                                        difficulty in
              SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                           focusing on
              WITHIN 24 HOURS                 Under 50                 nearby objects
              Damage to blood
              vessels in the retina
                                                                           Other
              due to diabetes or high
              blood sugar levels can                                    disturbance
              lead to blurred vision.
                                                        DISTURBED/IMPAIRED VISION      101

   What is the                     ACTION                         ACTION
  nature of your
   disturbed or             !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                              You may have
                            blockage of a blood
                                                             CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                             You may have a
                                                             migraine. However,
 impaired vision?
                            vessel that supplies the         the possibility of
                            brain or eye. Another            another disorder needs
 Sudden loss of all         possibility is a detached        to be ruled out.
   or part of the           retina, which needs
  vision in one or
                                                             • Rest in a darkened
                            prompt treatment.                quiet room until
      both eyes                                              symptoms improve.
                                                             • If you also have
                                                             a headache, take an
   Blurred vision
                                                             analgesic such as
                                                             acetaminophen.
  Seeing flashing                                            CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
      lights or                                              if you have had
   floating spots                                            previous migraines.
                                                             • Avoid red wine,
                                                             chocolate, and mature
   Double vision                                             cheese – all possible
                                                             migraine triggers.
       None of
      the above
                                   ACTION

                            !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                              This may be due to
                            bleeding in the brain,
                                                                  ACTION
                                                             SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                            such as with a stroke            WITHIN 24 HOURS
      ACTION                or subarachnoid                  Your symptoms may
                            hemorrhage (ruptured             be a side effect of the
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW        artery near the brain).          medication.
if you cannot identify      Another possibility is a
a possible cause for        weakness or paralysis            • Stop taking any over-
your disturbed or                                            the-counter medicines
                            of the muscles that
impaired vision from                                         but continue to take
                            control the movement
this chart.                                                  prescribed medication
                            of the eyes, causing
                                                             unless advised to stop
                            double vision.
                                                             by your doctor.

      ACTION
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                  ACTION
TO SEE YOUR                                                  SEE YOUR DOCTOR
OPHTHALMOLOGIST                                              WITHIN 24 HOURS
You may be developing            Are you                     if you cannot identify
presbyopia (gradual          currently taking                a possible cause for
loss of the eyes’ ability    any medication?                 your disturbed or
to focus on near                                             impaired vision from
objects).                                                    this chart.
                                   Medication

                                 No medication
102   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Earache
      Pain in one or both ears is a distressing symptom,
                                                                        ACTION
      especially for children. Earache is usually caused
                                                                   SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      by an infection in the outer or middle ear. Mild             WITHIN 24 HOURS
      discomfort, however, may be due to wax blockage.             You may have otitis
                                                                   media (middle-ear
      Consult your doctor if you suffer from earache,              infection) with a
      particularly if it is persistent. A severe or recurrent      perforated eardrum;
      middle-ear infection may damage hearing.                     otitis externa (outer-
                                                                   ear infection) is
                                                                   another possibility.

                                              ACTION               • Take an analgesic
             Does pulling                                          such as acetaminophen.
 START       the earlobe                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              make the                  TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
             pain worse?                Your earache is
                                        probably due to otitis          ACTION
                                        externa (infection of
            Increases pain              the outer ear) or a boil   MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                        in the ear canal.          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR

                                        • Take an analgesic        if the discomfort
                                        such as acetaminophen.     persists for longer than
           Pain is no worse
                                                                   24 hours. Barotrauma
                                                                   (ear damage or pain
                                                                   caused by pressure
                                                                   changes) may be the
                                                                   cause of your pain.

                                              Is there
                                            a discharge
                                             from the
                                           affected ear?               Did the pain
               ACTION                                                 start during or
         TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES                                        immediately
         A cold may often be                  Discharge              after an airplane
         accompanied by mild                                               flight?
         earache. Persistent or
         severe earache is likely           No discharge
         to be due to otitis media                                       During or
         (middle-ear infection).                                       immediately
         • Take a decongestant                                          after flight
         to relieve stuffiness and
         an analgesic, such as                                         Unrelated to
         acetaminophen, to                                              air travel
         relieve discomfort.               Do you have
         CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR                a runny or
         if the pain is severe             stuffy nose?
         or if it persists for
                                                                        ACTION
         longer than 2 days.
                                                  Yes              SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                   WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                                   if you cannot identify a
                                                                   possible cause for your
                                                  No
                                                                   earache from this chart.
                                                                  EARACHE • SORE THROAT        103

   Sore throat
   A raw or rough feeling in the throat is a symptom
                                                                          ACTION
   that most people have from time to time. A sore
                                                                     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
   throat is often the first sign of a common cold and is            TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   also a feature of other viral infections. You can treat           You may be suffering
                                                                     from infectious
   a sore throat yourself at home unless you also have               mononucleosis.
   other, more serious symptoms. However, if your
   sore throat persists or is severe, consult your doctor.
                                                                        Do you have
                                                                        any of these?
           Do you have                  Do you have
START       a fever – a                swelling in your                   General
          temperature of                groin and/or                   aches and pains
           100.4°F (38°C)                 armpits ?
            or above?
                                                                         Runny nose
                                                Yes
                 Fever
                                                                           Headache
                                                No
               No fever
                                                                             Cough

                                           ACTION
                                                                           None of
                                     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                  the above
                                     TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                     You may have either
                                     tonsillitis or pharyngitis
                                     (inflamed throat).                   ACTION
              ACTION                 • Follow the advice             TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
        TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES       for soothing a sore
                                                                     You probably have
        Activities such as           throat (p.164).
                                                                     a severe cold or flu.
        smoking or breathing                                         • Follow the advice
        smoke, shouting, and                                         for bringing down a
        loud singing are likely to                                   fever (p.164).
                                       Before the onset
        cause throat irritation.                                     CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                         of your sore
        • Follow the advice            throat, had you
                                                                     if your symptoms
        for soothing a sore                                          worsen, change, or are
        throat (p.164).                been doing any                no better after 2 days.
        CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR               of these?
        if your symptoms
        worsen, change, or are         Smoking heavily
        no better in 2 days.
                                                                          ACTION
                                        or breathing
                                                                     TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                           smoke
                                                                     You may have a cold.

                                           Shouting or               • Follow the advice
                                                                     for soothing a sore
                                         singing loudly              throat (p.164).
                                                                     CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                            None of                  if you are no better
                                           the above                 within 2 days.
104    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Hoarseness or loss of voice
       The sudden onset of hoarseness or huskiness of the
       voice is a common symptom of upper respiratory                !   Persistent change
                                                                         in the voice
       tract infections that involve the larynx or vocal                 It is important to seek
       cords. Such infections are almost always caused by                medical advice if you develop
                                                                         hoarseness or any other voice
       viruses. Hoarseness and loss of voice that develop                change that lasts for more
       gradually are most commonly caused by overuse of                  than 2 weeks, since the slight
                                                                         possibility of cancer of the
       the voice, smoking, or, rarely, cancer of the larynx.             larynx needs to be ruled out.

                  How long                 Do you use your
      START      ago did the                voice a lot; for
               hoarseness or                 example, are
                loss of voice                you a singer
                  develop?                    or teacher?
                                                                                 ACTION
                   Over a                        Normal
                  week ago                      voice use                  MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                 Within the                   Regular loud                 Regular overuse of
                 past week                      voice use                  your voice can lead
                                                                           to chronic laryngitis
                                                                           or vocal cord nodules
                                                                           (small, noncancerous
                                                                           lumps found on the
                                                                           vocal cords).
                                                                           • If you smoke, stop.
                                               ACTION                      • Try inhaling steam
                                                                           from a bowl of hot
                                          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES           water (p.165) to relieve
                                          You probably have                your hoarseness.
                                          acute viral laryngitis.          • Rest your voice as
               Have you had               • If you smoke, stop.            much as possible.
                 any of the               • Try inhaling steam
                 following                from a bowl of hot
                                          water (p.165) to relieve
              symptoms in the             your hoarseness.
                past week?
                                          • Rest your voice as
                                          much as possible.                 Before the onset
                 Runny nose               CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                             of hoarseness,
               and/or sneezing            if you do not feel
                                          better within 2 days
                                                                             had you been
                                          or if any other                   using your voice
                   Cough                  symptoms develop.                 more than usual?

                                                                              More voice use
                 Sore throat
                                                                               than usual

                   None of                                                      Normal voice
                  the above                                                         use
                                                       HOARSENESS OR LOSS OF VOICE        105

  Do you smoke,                  ACTION                            ACTION
   or have you             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
  smoked in the            TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      past?                Heavy smoking over a               Hypothyroidism
                           long period of time                (underactivity of the
                           can result in laryngitis.          thyroid gland) can
          Yes              • If you smoke, stop.              cause a husky voice.
                           • Rest your voice as
                           much as possible.
          No               Another possibility is
                           cancer of the larynx,
                           which is more common
                           in regular smokers.

     ACTION                                                      Do you have
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES                                            any of the
Excessive use of the                                              following?
voice can inflame the
vocal cords.
• If you smoke, stop.                                                Fatigue
• Try inhaling steam            ACTION
from a bowl of hot
water (p.165) to relieve   CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                  Increased skin
your hoarseness.           Breathing in dust,                      dryness or
                           fumes, or smoke can                     roughness
• Rest your voice as       inflame the airways.
much as possible.
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR                                               Feeling the
if your voice is no                                             cold more than
better within 2 days                                              you used to
or if any other
symptoms develop.                                                 Unexplained
                                 ACTION                           weight gain
                           TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                                  General hair
                           Being in a smoky
                           atmosphere can inflame                  thinning
    Did either of          the vocal cords.
                                                                     None of
   the following           • If you smoke, stop.                    the above
    apply before           • Try inhaling steam
    the onset of           from a bowl of hot
                           water (p.165) to relieve
    hoarseness?            your hoarseness.
                           • Rest your voice as
 You inhaled dust,         much as possible.
  chemical fumes,          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
     or smoke              if your voice is no
    from a fire            better within 2 days
                           or if any other                          ACTION
                           symptoms develop.
     You spent
                                                              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
  time in a smoky                                             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
    atmosphere                                                if you cannot identify
                                                              a possible cause for
                                                              your hoarseness or loss
       Neither
                                                              of voice from this chart.
106    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Coughing (adults)
       For children under 12, see p.108
       A natural defence mechanism, coughing is the body’s         !   Coughing up blood
                                                                       If you cough up sputum that
       way of clearing the airways of inhaled particles or             contains streaks of blood on
       secretions. Persistent coughing may be due to infection         one occasion only, the most
                                                                       likely cause is a small tear in
       or inflammation in the lungs or to the effects of               the lining of the windpipe; if
       irritants such as tobacco smoke. Persistent coughing            you feel well, you need not
                                                                       be concerned. However, if
       should be investigated by your doctor.                          you have more than one such
                                                                       episode, there may be a more
                                                                       serious cause; you should see
                                                                       a doctor without delay.
                   How long                  Do you have
      START      have you had                 a fever – a
                   a cough?                 temperature of
                                             100.4°F (38°C)
                    Less than                 or above?
                    48 hours

                                                  Fever
                 Over 48 hours                                                  ACTION
                                                                         TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                No fever                 A cough is the body’s
                                                                         way of clearing the
                                                                         lungs.
                                                                          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                         if your cough continues
                                                                         for more than 1 hour.
                   Are you                     Are you
               currently taking              coughing up
                any prescribed                 sputum?
                 medication?
                                                                                Are you
                                                Sputum
                                                                               a smoker?
                   Medication

                                               No sputum
                 No medication                                                   Smoker

                                                                               Nonsmoker

                    ACTION                     ACTION
              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              Your symptoms may           You may have asthma
              be a side effect of the     or another chronic
                                                                                ACTION
              medication.                 lung disorder. Lung            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              • Continue to take          cancer is unlikely but         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              the medication unless       should be ruled out.           if you cannot identify a
              advised to stop by                                         possible cause for your
              your doctor.                                               cough from this chart.
                                                    COUGHING (ADULTS)        107

   Do you have                ACTION                   ACTION
   either of the         CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW    TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
    following?           You may have            You may have acute
                         pneumonia.              bronchitis.
      Pain on            • Take acetaminophen    • Take acetaminophen
     breathing           to help reduce your     to reduce your fever
                         fever and pain.         and chest pain.
     Shortness                                   • Drink plenty of fluids.
     of breath                                   • If you smoke, stop.
                                                 CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                              Have you           if your symptoms
      Neither                coughed up          worsen or if you are
                               sputum?           no better within 2 days.

                               Sputum

     Have you
  inhaled any of              No sputum                ACTION
 these in the last
    few hours?                                   TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                 You may have a viral
                                                 illness such as a severe
                              ACTION             cold or flu.
  Particle of food
                         CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW    • Follow the advice
                         Inflammation of the     for bringing down a
                         airways can result      fever (p.164).
  Tobacco smoke          from breathing in any
                         of these substances.    • Try inhaling steam
                                                 from a bowl of hot
  Dust, fumes, or                                water (p.165) to relieve
 smoke from a fire                               your symptoms.
                                                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                            Do you have
      None of                                    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                            either of the        if you are no better
     the above
                             following?          in 2 days or if other
                                                 symptoms develop.

                             Runny nose
     ACTION
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                             Sore throat
Smoke can irritate
the lungs.
• Move into a well-                                    ACTION
                                Neither
ventilated area.                                 TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                 You probably have a
                                                 viral infection, such
                                                 as a cold.
     ACTION                   ACTION             • Try inhaling steam
                                                 from a bowl of hot
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT      MAKE AN APPOINTMENT     water (p.165) to relieve
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR      your symptoms.
You may have chronic     Asthma or possibly      MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
lung damage from         heart failure may be    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
smoking or possibly      the cause of your       if you are no better
lung cancer.             symptoms.               in 2 days or if other
• Stop smoking.          • If you smoke, stop.   symptoms develop.
108    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Coughing (children)
           For adults and children over 12, see p.106
       Coughing is a normal reaction to irritation in the      !   Danger signs
                                                                   Dial 911 or call EMS if your
       throat or lungs. Most coughs are due to minor               child is coughing and has any
       infections of the nose and/or throat, but a sudden          of the following symptoms:

       onset of coughing may be caused by choking.                 • Blue-tinged lips or tongue.
                                                                   • Abnormal drowsiness.
       Coughing is unusual in babies less than 6 months            • Inability to produce sounds.
       old and may indicate a serious lung infection.              • Inability to drink.
                                                                   • Excessively rapid breathing.

                   How long has
                                             How old is
      START       your child been                                           ACTION
                                             your child?
                    coughing?
                                                                       CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                                       Your baby may have
                     Started                                           a serious lung infection
                                          Under 6 months
                  suddenly a few                                       such as bronchiolitis
                   minutes ago                                         (inflamed small
                                              6 months                 airways in the lungs).
                   Started more                or over                 • Keep your baby
                    than a few                                         sitting up, if possible
                   minutes ago                                         in a steamy bathroom.

                                           Is your child’s              Does the cough
              Is it possible that             breathing                   have either
                  your child is              abnormally                    of these
               choking on food             rapid or noisy               characteristics?
              or a small object?              (see p.71)?
                                                                           Comes in fits
                       Possible              Abnormally                    ending with
                                               rapid                         a whoop

                      Unlikely                                           Is accompanied
                                                Noisy
                                                                           by vomiting

                                               Neither                        Neither

                     ACTION
              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
              An inhaled object may
              be the cause of the
              coughing. Follow the            ACTION                        ACTION
              first-aid advice for       GO TO ANOTHER CHART           SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              choking (pp.22–24).        Breathing problems            WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                         (children), p.112             Your child may
              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                if the object is not
              dislodged immediately.
                                                                       have pertussis
                                                                       (whooping cough).
                                                  COUGHING (CHILDREN)         109

    Does your                 ACTION                    ACTION
   child have a          MAKE AN APPOINTMENT      TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
   runny nose?           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR       Your child probably
                         Your child may have      has a viral illness, such
 Most of the time        an allergy or possibly   as a cold or flu.
  or very often          enlarged adenoids.       • Follow the advice
                                                  for bringing down a
                                                  fever (p.164).
  Has developed
   a runny nose                                   •Try inhaling steam
                                                  from a bowl of hot
  within the past
                                                  water (p.165) or sitting
     few days                                     in a steamy bathroom.
                          Does your child
                           have a fever –         CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
  No runny nose                                   if symptoms worsen, if
                           a temperature
                                                  your child is no better
                          of 100.4°F (38°C)       in 2 days, or if other
                             or above?            symptoms develop.

                                 Fever

    When does
   the coughing                No fever                 ACTION
      occur?                                      TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                  Your child probably
                                                  has a cold.
  Mainly at night
                                                  •Try inhaling steam
                                                  from a bowl of hot
                                                  water (p.165) or sitting
   After exercise                                 in a steamy bathroom.
                            Are there
                          smokers in the          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
    When out in                                   if symptoms worsen, if
                          home or might
                                                  your child is no better
     the cold             your child have         in 2 days, or if other
                          been smoking?           symptoms develop.
      None of
     the above
                              Smokers in
                               the home

                             Child might
                               smoke                    ACTION
                                                  TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
     ACTION                                       Your child’s cough
                                Neither           may be a response
SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                   to being in a smoky
WITHIN 24 HOURS                                   atmosphere or to his
Your child’s symptoms                             or her own smoking.
may be due to asthma.
                                                  • Make sure that no
• Discourage your             ACTION              one smokes in the
child from activities                             house and avoid
that provoke coughing.   SEE YOUR DOCTOR          taking your child into
• Avoid unnecessary      WITHIN 24 HOURS          a smoky atmosphere.
exposure to dust,        if you cannot identify   • If you suspect that
pollen, or animal fur.   a possible cause for     your child may be
                         your child’s cough       smoking, encourage
                         from this chart.         him or her to stop.
110    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Shortness of breath (adults)
       For children under 12, see p.112
       Feeling short of breath is to be expected after strenuous   !   Danger signs
                                                                       Dial 911 or call EMS if either
       exercise. Breathing should return to normal after               you or someone you are
       resting. If you are short of breath at rest or following        with has one or both of
                                                                       the following symptoms:
       normal activities, such as getting dressed, you                 • Sudden and severe
       should consult your doctor because your symptom                   shortness of breath.

       may be due to a serious heart or lung disorder.                 • Blue-tinged lips.
                                                                       While waiting for medical
                                                                       help, loosen any restricting
                                                                       clothing and help the
                                                ACTION                 person sit upright.
                    Is breathing
      START            painful?            GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                           Chest pain, p.134

                                                                              Do you have
                       Painful                                                either of the
                                            How quickly did                    following?
                                            the shortness of
                     Not painful
                                              breath start?
                                                                             Swollen ankles

                                               Gradually,
                                             over a few days                   Cough with
                                                or longer                      sputum on
                                                                                most days
                  Have you been
                                                Suddenly,
                    wheezing?
                                             within the past                      Neither
                                                48 hours

                     Wheezing

                                              Do any of the
                    No wheezing                following                      Do you have
                                                 apply?                        any of the
                                                                               following?
                                            You have recently
                                              had surgery
                                                                               Waking at
                     ACTION
                                                                              night feeling
                                            You have recently
              GO TO ANOTHER CHART                                              breathless
              Wheezing, p.114                been immobile
                                             due to injury or
                                                                             Frothy pink or
                                               a long trip
                                                                             white sputum
                                             You have had a                   Temperature
                     ACTION                  baby within the                   of 100.4°F
                                              past 2 weeks                  (38°C) or above
              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                You may have a
              pulmonary embolism                 None of                         None of
              (blood clot in the lung).         the above                       the above
                                                     SHORTNESS OF BREATH (ADULTS)       111

      ACTION                     ACTION                           ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
WITHIN 24 HOURS             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR               TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
You may have chronic        You may have lung                You may have
heart failure, which        disease caused by                inflammation of the
causes fluid to gather in   inhaling damaging                lungs due to an allergy.
the lungs and tissues.      dusts or gases.
•If you smoke, stop.
•Avoid strenuous
exercise and stressful
situations.                  Do you have, or
                              have you ever
                               had, regular
                              exposure to or                      ACTION
                             contact with the
                                                             SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                following?                   WITHIN 24 HOURS
      ACTION                                                 You may be anemic,
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                          but a blood test will
                               Dust or fumes                 be needed to confirm
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
You may have chronic                                         the diagnosis.
bronchitis or lung              Grain crops,                 • Get plenty of rest.
damage from smoking.            caged birds,
• If you smoke, stop.            or animals
• Avoid exposure to
smoke, pollution, dust,
dampness, and cold.                Neither
• Exercise lightly.
                                                                Do you have
                                 Did the                         any of the
                               shortness of                      following?
                               breath start
                             straight after a                    Faintness or
      ACTION                 stressful event?                      fainting

CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                              Paler skin
You may have fluid on                                            than normal
                                     Yes
the lungs (pulmonary
edema) caused by
acute heart failure.                                            Undue fatigue
                                     No

                                                                   None of
                                                                  the above
      ACTION
                                 ACTION
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                            CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
You may have a lung
infection, such as          You may have had a
                            panic attack, but this
pneumonia, especially if
                            needs to be confirmed
                                                                  ACTION
you also have a cough.
                            by a doctor.                     SEE YOUR DOCTOR
• Take acetaminophen        • If you have had                WITHIN 24 HOURS
to reduce fever.
                            such attacks before,             if you cannot identify
                            breathing into a bag             a possible cause for
                            may relieve symptoms             your shortness of
                            (p.168).                         breath from this chart.
112    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Breathing problems (children)
          For adults and children over 12, see p.110
       Noisy or rapid breathing and shortness of breath      !   Danger signs
                                                                 Dial 911 or call EMS if your
       indicate breathing problems. Such problems may            child’s breathing rate is
       not be obvious in children, who may simply avoid          excessively rapid (see advice
                                                                 on checking your child’s
       exertion. A child with severe difficulty breathing        breathing rate, p.71) and
       needs urgent hospital treatment. Breathing problems       if breathing problems are
                                                                 accompanied by any of the
       that occur suddenly also need immediate attention.        following symptoms:
                                                                 •  Blue-tinged lips or tongue.
                                                                 •  Abnormal drowsiness.
                How long has               Is it possible        •  Inability to swallow, talk,
                                                                    or produce sounds.
      START     your child had           that your child
                  breathing               is choking on
                  problems?              food or a small
                                               object?
                    Started
                suddenly, a few
                                             Possible                       ACTION
                  minutes ago
                                                                     TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                 Started more                                        An inhaled object may
                                             Unlikely                be causing difficulty
                  than a few
                 minutes ago                                         breathing. Follow the
                                                                     first-aid advice for
                                                                     choking (pp.22–24).

                                         Are any of the              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                       if object is not
                                          danger signs               dislodged immediately.
                                          listed in the
                                           box above
                                             present?

                                           Danger signs
                                             present                        ACTION
                   ACTION
              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW       No danger signs
                                                                     !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                       Your child may have
                                                                     a serious respiratory
              The cause of these
                                                                     problem.
              symptoms could be a
              serious lung infection                                 • If your child stops
              such as bronchiolitis                                  breathing, follow the
              (inflamed small                                        first-aid advice for
              airways in the lungs).                                 giving rescue breaths
                                           How old is
                                                                     (pp.16–17).
              • Keep your baby             your child?
              sitting up, if possible
              in a steamy bathroom.
                                         Under 6 months

                                            6 months
                                             or over
                                         BREATHING PROBLEMS (CHILDREN)         113

 Does your child
  have any of
 the following?

  Noisy breathing                                       ACTION
                                                  CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                  These symptoms may
   Barking cough                                  be due to croup
                                                  (inflammation of the
      Shortness                                   windpipe).
      of breath                                   • Sit with your child
                                                  in a steamy bathroom
      None of                                     to relieve breathing
                                                  difficulties.
     the above
                                                  • Encourage your child
                                                  to drink plenty of fluids.
                                                  • Ensure that your
                                                  child sits quietly and
                              Does your           avoids exertion.
 Does your child             child suffer
  have a fever –           from repeated
  a temperature              episodes of
 of 100.4°F (38°C)           any of the
    or above?                following?

        Fever                Wheezing                   ACTION
                                                  SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                             Coughing             WITHIN 24 HOURS
      No fever                                    Your child may have
                              at night
                                                  developed asthma.
                           Coughing after         • Keep your child
                              exercise            rested and warm.
                                                  • Minimize contact
                           Coughing after         with any possible
                            going out in          triggers, such as dust,
     ACTION                                       pollen, or animal fur.
                              the cold
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                              • Avoid exposing your
Your child may have a                             child to smoke.
                              None of
lung infection, such as
                             the above            • Avoid using perfume
pneumonia. Another                                and air fresheners.
possible cause is
bronchiolitis (inflamed
small airways in the
lungs), particularly
in young children.
• Give your child                                       ACTION
liquid acetaminophen
to reduce fever.                                  SEE YOUR DOCTOR
• Offer frequent drinks.                          WITHIN 24 HOURS
• Increase the humidity                           if you cannot identify
in your child’s room by                           a possible cause for
putting a bowl of water                           the breathing problems
near a radiator.                                  from this chart.
114   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Wheezing
          For children under 12, see p.112
                                                                      ACTION
      A whistling or rasping sound on exhaling occurs
                                                                CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
      when the air passages become narrowed. The most           You could be having
      common causes are inflammation due to infection,          an asthma attack.
      asthma, or inhaled dust. In rare cases, a narrowing       • If you have a reliever
                                                                inhaler, use it now.
      of the airways may be due to a tumor. If you have         • Stay calm and sit in
      persistent wheezing, you should see your doctor.          a comfortable position.

              Has the                   Do you have
 START     wheezing come                either of the              Are you short
            on suddenly                  following?                 of breath?
           within the past
            few hours or                Frothy pink or
           gradually over               white sputum               Short of breath
           days or weeks?
                                          Waking at                   Not short
                                         night feeling                of breath
            Sudden onset
                                          breathless

            Gradual onset                   Neither
                                                                      ACTION
                                                                SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                                You may be having
            Do you have                                         a mild asthma attack.
             a fever – a                                        • Use a reliever drug
                                                                if you have one.
           temperature of                 ACTION
            100.4°F (38°C)                                      • Try to avoid polluted
                                     CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW       or smoky atmospheres.
             or above?               There is a possibility
                                     of fluid on the lungs
                                     caused by heart failure.
                Fever                                                 ACTION
                                                                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              No fever                                          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                Your symptoms may
                                                                be caused by chronic
                                                                bronchitis or lung
                                                                damage from smoking.
                                       Do you cough
              ACTION                    up sputum?
         SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         WITHIN 24 HOURS                                              ACTION
         You may have acute               Most days             SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         bronchitis.                                            WITHIN 24 HOURS
         • Take acetaminophen                                   if you cannot identify a
         to reduce your fever.             Seldom               possible cause for your
         • If you smoke, stop.             or never             wheezing from this chart.
                                                WHEEZING • DIFFICULTY SWALLOWING       115

   Difficulty swallowing
   Any difficulty swallowing is usually the result of a
   sore throat due to infection. Self-treatment should           Do you get a
                                                                 burning pain
   ease the soreness and allow normal swallowing.                in the center
   However, persistent difficulty swallowing may be             of the chest in
   due to a disorder of the stomach or esophagus, the           either of these
                                                                  situations?
   tube connecting the throat to the stomach, and
   should be investigated by your doctor.                         When you
                                                                 bend forward

                                      Which of the                 When you
              Is your
START                                  following                   lie down
           throat sore?
                                        applies?
                                                                     Neither
                                      Food seems to
                Sore
                                     stick high up in
                                         the chest
              Not sore
                                                                   ACTION
                                         You have             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                        a feeling of          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                     something being          You probably have an
                                    stuck in the throat       inflamed esophagus
           Is it possible                                     due to acid reflux.
          that you have
            swallowed                     Neither
            something
                                                                Does either of
          sharp, such as
                                                                the following
           a fish bone?
                                                                   apply?

              Possible                   ACTION                  The difficulty
                                                                 swallowing is
                                   MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                 getting worse
                                   TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              Unlikely
                                   Anxiety disorders
                                   may be a cause of                You have
                                   this type of difficulty         lost weight
                                   swallowing.
             ACTION
                                                                     Neither
        GO TO ANOTHER CHART
        Sore throat, p.103

                                                                   ACTION
                                         ACTION
                                                              SEE YOUR DOCTOR
             ACTION
                                   MAKE AN APPOINTMENT        WITHIN 24 HOURS
        CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR         You may have a
        Something may have         if you cannot identify a   narrowed esophagus
        either scratched your      possible cause for your    caused by acid reflux,
        throat or become           difficulty swallowing      but cancer of the
        lodged in it.              from this chart.           esophagus is possible.
116    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Vomiting (adults)
       For children under 12, see p.118
       Irritation or inflammation of the digestive tract is the      !   Danger signs
                                                                         Dial 911 or call EMS if your
       most common cause of vomiting. But vomiting may                   vomit contains blood, which
       also be triggered by conditions affecting the brain               may appear in any of the
                                                                         following forms:
       or by an inner-ear disorder, or it can be a side effect           • Bright red streaks.
       of medication. If you suffer from frequent episodes               • Black material that
                                                                           resembles coffee grounds.
       of vomiting, you should consult your doctor.
                                                                         • Blood clots.

                  Have you
      START     suffered from                                                      ACTION
                other episodes
                                                                             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                 of vomiting?
                                                                             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                  ACTION                     You may have a
                    Previous               CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW              digestive tract disorder.
                    episodes               You may have acute
                                           glaucoma (a painful,
                                           rapid rise in fluid
                 Single episode
                                           pressure in the eye),
                                           especially if your                   Do you have
                                           vision is also blurred.
                                                                                a headache?

                                               Do you have                         Headache
                 Do you have
                                                 pain in or
                  pain in the
                                              around an eye?
                  abdomen?                                                       No headache

                                                   Eye pain
                  Severe pain

                                                 No eye pain                    Do you have
                   Mild pain
                                                                                 any of the
                                                                                 following?
                    No pain
                                                  ACTION                       Temperature of
                                                                                100.4°F (38°C)
                                          !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                             You may have had a
                                          stroke. Your symptoms
                                                                                  or above

                                          may also be caused by                     Diarrhea
                                          labyrinthitis (inflamed
                   ACTION                 inner ear).
              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW         • You can minimize                      Dizziness
              You could have a             the symptoms of
              serious abdominal            labyrinthitis by lying
              condition, such as           down or moving as                        None of
              appendicitis.                little as possible.                     the above
                                                                 VOMITING (ADULTS)      117

!   Vomiting and
    medications
                                        Have you
                                     eaten or drunk
                                                                   ACTION
                                                             TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
    If you are taking any oral
                                       any of the            You probably have
    medication, including oral
                                       following?            gastritis (inflammation
    contraceptives, an episode
    of vomiting may reduce
                                                             of the stomach lining).
    the effectiveness of the           An unusually          • Take over-the-counter
    drug because your body                                   antacids to neutralize
                                         large or            the acid in the stomach.
    cannot absorb the active
                                        rich meal
    ingredients. If you use oral
    contraceptives, you will
                                                             • Eat small meals at
                                                             regular intervals.
    need to use an additional             A large
    form of contraception such           amount of
                                                             • Stop drinking alcohol
                                                             until you are better.
    as condoms for some time              alcohol
    after the vomiting has                                   • If you smoke, stop.
    stopped. Follow the                                      CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
    instructions provided with        Food that may          if you are no better
    the oral contraceptives or          have been            in 2 days or if other
    consult your doctor if you        contaminated           symptoms develop.
    are not sure what to do.
    You should also see your              None of
    doctor if you are taking any
    other prescribed medicine
                                         the above
    and have been vomiting.

                                         ACTION                Are you taking
                                   TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES     any medication?
                                   You may have food
                                   poisoning.
             ACTION                • Follow the advice            Medication
                                   for preventing
      GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                                   dehydration (p.165).
      Headache, p.84
                                   CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR          No medication
                                   if you are no better
                                   in 2 days or if other
                                   symptoms develop.

             ACTION
      TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
      You may have a case
      of gastroenteritis.
      • Follow the advice                ACTION                    ACTION
      for preventing
                                   SEE YOUR DOCTOR           SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      dehydration (p.165).
                                   WITHIN 24 HOURS           WITHIN 24 HOURS
      CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                   Your symptoms may         if you cannot identify
      if you are no better
                                   be a side effect of the   a possible cause for
      in 2 days or if other
                                   medication.               your vomiting from
      symptoms develop.
                                   • Stop taking any over-   this chart.
                                   the-counter medicines
                                   but continue to take
                                   prescribed medication
                                   unless advised to stop
                                   by your doctor.
118    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Vomiting (children)
           For adults and children over 12, see p.116
       Children vomit as a result of many illnesses,                !   Danger signs
                                                                        Dial 911 or call EMS if
       including ear infections and urinary and digestive               your child’s vomiting is
       tract disorders. Anxiety or excitement may also                  accompanied by any of
                                                                        the following symptoms:
       cause vomiting. Rarely, vomiting may be due to                   • Greenish yellow vomit.
       an infection or injury to the brain. If vomiting is              • Abdominal pain for 4 hours.
       persistent, consult your child’s doctor urgently.                • Flat, dark-red or purple
                                                                          spots on skin that do not
                                                                          fade when pressed.

                                                ACTION                  • Refusal to drink or feed
                  Has your child                                          (in babies) for over 6 hours.
      START        had a recent                                         • Abnormal drowsiness.
                   head injury?          !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                            Your child may have         • Sunken eyes.
                                          a concussion.                 • Dry tongue.

                    Head injury
                                          • Do not allow your           • Not urinating during
                                          child to eat or drink.          the day for 3 hours (if child
                                                                          is under 1 year old) or 6
                                                                          hours (in an older child).
                  No head injury                                        • Black or bloodstained feces.

                                               How old is
                                               your child?
                                                                             Apart from the
                  Does your child                                           vomiting, is your
                   have any of                                               baby generally
                  the following?             Under 3 months
                                                                              not well, i.e.
                                                                               feverish or
                      Severe                     3 months                       drowsy?
                     headache                     or over

                     Drowsiness                                                   Not well
                    or confusion
                                                ACTION
                     Dislike of           CALL YOUR CHILD’S                          Well
                    bright light          DOCTOR NOW
                                          These symptoms may
                    Pain when             indicate a serious
                   bending neck           abdominal condition.                   ACTION
                                                                            CALL YOUR CHILD’S
                      None of
                                                                            DOCTOR NOW
                     the above                                              These symptoms may
                                           Does your child
                                            seem to have                    have numerous causes.
                                                                            However, any infant
                                           abdominal pain?                  under 3 months who
                     ACTION                                                 does not seem well and
                                                                            vomits needs prompt
              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                Your child may have
              meningitis (inflamed
                                                    Yes
                                                                            medical attention.

              membranes around
                                                    No
              the brain).
                                                         VOMITING (CHILDREN)         119

   What are the                                               ACTION
 characteristics of                                     TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
  the vomiting?                   ACTION                This type of vomiting
                            BRING YOUR CHILD TO         is rarely serious and has
    Frequent and            THE DOCTOR WITHIN           several possible causes.
   effortless after         24 HOURS This type of       •Always burp your
       feeding              vomiting in an infant       baby after feeding.
                            may be the result of a      CONSULT YOUR CHILD’S
                            digestive tract problem,    DOCTOR if your infant
   Forceful after           such as pyloric stenosis,   does not seem well or
  several feedings          in which the stomach        is failing to gain weight.
                            outlet becomes
  Occasional, not           abnormally narrowed.
  associated with
      feeding
                                                              ACTION
                                 Does your
                                 child have             CALL YOUR CHILD’S
                                                        DOCTOR NOW if your
                                 diarrhea?
      ACTION                                            child is under 6 months
                                                        old. He may have a
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES             Diarrhea             case of gastroenteritis.
Babies often vomit for                                  • Make sure older
no particular reason. It                                children drink plenty
is no cause for concern                                 of clear fluids.
if the baby seems well          No diarrhea
                                                        CONSULT YOUR CHILD’S
and is gaining weight.                                  DOCTOR if your child is
• Be sure to burp your                                  no better within 24
baby after each feeding.                                hours or if any other
                             Does your child
CONSULT YOUR CHILD’S                                    symptoms develop.
DOCTOR if your baby
                              have any of
seems sick or vomits         the following?
frequently.
                                 Pain when
                                  urinating                   ACTION
                                                        BRING YOUR CHILD TO

      ACTION                      Renewed               THE DOCTOR WITHIN 24
                                 bedwetting             HOURS He may have a
CALL YOUR CHILD’S                or daytime             urinary tract infection.
DOCTOR NOW Your
                                 “accidents”            • Give plenty of fluids
child may have a lung                                   to drink.
infection such as
pertussis, bronchiolitis,       Temperature
or pneumonia.                    of 100.4°F
                              (38°C) or above
                                                              ACTION
                                   None of
                                  the above             BRING YOUR CHILD TO
   Did vomiting                                         THE DOCTOR WITHIN
  follow violent                                        24 HOURS Your child
                                                        may have an infection
    coughing?                     ACTION                such as acute otitis
                            BRING YOUR CHILD TO         media (an infection of
      Followed              THE DOCTOR WITHIN           the middle ear) or a
      coughing              24 HOURS if you cannot      urinary tract infection.
                            identify a cause for        • Give liquid
                            your child’s vomiting       acetaminophen to
    No coughing
                            from this chart.            relieve pain and fever.
120    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Abdominal pain (adults)
       For children under 12, see p.124
       Mild abdominal pain is often due to a stomach or             !   Danger signs
                                                                        Dial 911 or call EMS if you
       bowel upset that will clear up without treatment.                have severe abdominal pain
       However, severe or persistent abdominal pain,                    that lasts for longer than
                                                                        4 hours and is associated
       especially if it is accompanied by other symptoms,               with any of the following
       may indicate a more serious problem that should                  additional symptoms:

       be investigated by your doctor.                                  • Vomiting.
                                                                        • Fever.
                                                                        • Swollen or tender abdomen.
                                                                        • Feeling faint, drowsy, or
                   Have you had                                           confused.
                                              How severe
      START          more than
                                              is the pain?              • Blood in the urine or feces.
                    one episode
                      of pain?
                                                  Severe
                        Single
                     continuous
                       episode                   Mild or                       Do you have
                                                moderate                        diarrhea?
                     Recurrent
                     episodes
                                                                                  Diarrhea

                                               Are any
                                             danger signs                       No diarrhea
                                               present?

                                              Danger signs
                     ACTION
              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                            No danger signs
              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              You may have a urinary
              tract problem or a
              digestive tract disorder.
                                                                                 ACTION
                                               ACTION
                                                                            SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES            WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                          You may have a case               You may have
                                          of gastroenteritis.               gallstones, especially
                                          • Drink plenty of                 if you have suffered
                                          clear fluids or over-             from nausea and
                                          the-counter rehydration           vomiting following
                     ACTION               solutions to prevent              a fatty meal.
                                          dehydration.                      • Take an analgesic
              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                You may have a
              serious abdominal
                                          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                          if you are no better
                                                                            such as acetaminophen
                                                                            to relieve symptoms.
              condition, such as          in 2 days or if other             • Avoid eating foods
              appendicitis.               symptoms develop.                 that are high in fat.
                                               ABDOMINAL PAIN (ADULTS)        121

      ACTION                                            ACTION
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
You may have kidney                               TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
stones, especially if you                         You may have
have been vomiting.                               nonulcer dyspepsia (a
• Drink plenty of                                 recurrent and persistent
                            Do any of the         form of indigestion) or
fluids to flush the
stones into the urine.
                             following            gastroesophageal
                               apply?             reflux, in which acid
• Save any urine you                              from the stomach is
pass, particularly if
you pass a stone.           Pain is related       regurgitated into the
                              to eating           esophagus.
• Take acetaminophen
to relieve discomfort.                            • Eat small meals at
                            Pain is relieved      regular intervals.
                              by antacids         • Avoid eating shortly
                                                  before going to bed.
   What kind of             Pain comes on         • Reduce your intake of
                                                  alcohol, coffee, and tea.
     pain have              when lying or
     you been               bending over          • If you smoke, stop.
   experiencing?
                               None of
                              the above
  Pain that starts
  in the back and                                       ACTION
    may move to
                                                  GO TO ANOTHER CHART
      the groin
                                                  Chest pain, p.134

    Pain in the
   center of the            Do you have
  upper abdomen             either of the
                             following?                 ACTION
    Pain in the
    upper right                                   SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                              Pain when           WITHIN 24 HOURS
   abdomen that                urinating          You may have cystitis
   may spread to
                                                  or a urine infection
     the back               Urinating more        that has spread to one
                              often than          or both kidneys.
    Pain mainly                  usual            • For both conditions,
  below the waist                                 take an analgesic such
                                                  as acetaminophen.
       None of                 Neither
                                                  • Drink 1 pint
      the above                                   (500 ml) of fluid
                                                  every hour for 4 hours.
                                                  • Drinking cranberry
                                                  juice may relieve the
                               Are you            burning sensation.
                              female or
      ACTION                    male?
SEE YOUR DOCTOR
WITHIN 24 HOURS                 Female                  ACTION
if you cannot identify
a possible cause for                              GO TO ANOTHER CHART
your abdominal pain                               Abdominal pain
                                 Male             (women), p.122
from this chart.
122    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Abdominal pain (women)
           First refer to abdominal pain, p.120
       Several disorders specific to women can cause                !   Abdominal pain
                                                                        during pregnancy
       discomfort or pain in the lower abdomen. Many of                 Intermittent, mild abdominal
       these conditions are related to the reproductive tract           pains are common throughout
                                                                        pregnancy due to stretching
       (ovaries, uterus, or fallopian tubes) or to pregnancy.           of the muscles and ligaments
       Abdominal pain that occurs during pregnancy                      of the abdomen. Abdominal
                                                                        pain that occurs in early
       should always be taken seriously.                                pregnancy can be due to
                                                                        complications, such as
                                                                        miscarriage or an ectopic
                                               ACTION                   pregnancy. In later pregnancy,
                 Do you have                                            pain is most commonly caused
      START     pain when you             SEE YOUR DOCTOR               by the onset of labor. Rarely,
                   urinate?               WITHIN 24 HOURS               partial separation of the
                                          You may have cystitis.        placenta from the wall of
                                                                        the uterus may occur.
                                          • Take an analgesic
                       Yes                such as acetaminophen.        • If you develop severe pain,
                                                                          call your doctor at once.
                                          • Drink 1 pint
                                          (500 ml) of fluid every
                       No                 hour for 4 hours.
                                          • Drinking cranberry
                                          juice may help relieve
                                          the burning sensation.
                                                                                Have you
                                                                               had sexual
                                                                               intercourse
                                                                               in the past
                                                Are you                         3 months?
                                               pregnant?

                                                                                     Yes
                                             More than 14
                   ACTION                   weeks pregnant
              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                                   No
              You could be having            Less than 14
              a late miscarriage or         weeks pregnant
              placental abruption
              (separation of the                 Do not
              placenta from the                 think so
              wall of the uterus).
              • Rest in bed until you                                         Did your last
              receive medical advice.
                                                                            menstrual period
                                               ACTION                       occur at the time
                                                                             you expected?
                                          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                          Pain at this stage may
                                          indicate a threatened                   On time
                                          miscarriage or an
                                          ectopic pregnancy.
                                          • Rest in bed until you             Missed or late
                                          receive medical advice.
                                                     ABDOMINAL PAIN (WOMEN)       123

   Do you have                  ACTION
   either of the           SEE YOUR DOCTOR
    following?             WITHIN 24 HOURS
                           You may have pelvic
     Abnormal              inflammatory disease,
                           in which there is an          Do you have an
      vaginal
                           infection in the                intrauterine
     discharge             reproductive organs.           contraceptive
                           • Your partner may             device (IUD)?
        Fever              also need to have tests
                           for infection.
                                                                 IUD
     Neither of
     the above
                                                               No IUD
                                Is the pain
                             related to your
                                menstrual
                                   cycle?

                               Occurs just
                              before and/or
                             during a period

                              Occurs briefly
    Have you                   in midcycle
     passed                                                  ACTION
   menopause?                   Unrelated               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                        This particular form of
  Premenopausal                                         contraception can cause
                                                        increased menstrual
                                                        pain, particularly for
  Postmenopausal                ACTION                  the first few cycles
                                                        after insertion.
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                           Some women regularly
                           have pain associated
                           with their ovulation.
                           However, other
                           possible causes do
                           need to be ruled out.

                                ACTION                       ACTION
     ACTION
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT          GO TO ANOTHER CHART
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR           Menstrual pain, p.156
There is a possibility     if you cannot identify
of an ectopic pregnancy.   a possible cause for
• Rest in bed until you    your lower abdominal
receive medical advice.    pain from this chart.
124    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Abdominal pain (children)
          For adults and children over 12, see p.120
       Many children suffer from abdominal pain at some             !   Danger signs
                                                                        Dial 911 or call an ambulance
       time, and some children have recurrent episodes.                 if your child’s abdominal pain
       Usually, the cause is not serious, and the pain                  is accompanied by any of the
                                                                        following symptoms:
       subsides in a few hours without treatment. In rare               •  Greenish yellow vomit.
       cases, abdominal pain is a symptom of a serious                  •  Pain in the groin or scrotum.
       disorder that requires prompt medical attention.                 •  Blood in the feces.
                                                                        •  Pain has been continuous
                                                                           for more than 4 hours.

               Does your child                  ACTION
      START      have severe
                pain in either           !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                           Your child may have
                                         a strangulated hernia or
                                                                                   ACTION
               of the following
                    places?              a testis that is twisted
                                         within the scrotum.                !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                              Your child may have
                                                                            a serious abdominal
                                         • Do not allow your                condition, such as
                        Groin            child to eat or drink.
                                                                            appendicitis.
                                                                            • Do not allow your
                                                                            child to eat or drink.
                      Scrotum

                                             Does your child
                       Neither                have any of
                                             the following?

                                               Continuous                          ACTION
                                              pain for more
                                              than 4 hours
                                                                            !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                              Your child may have
                                                                            an obstruction of the
                                                 Blood in                   intestine.
                                                 the feces
                                                                            • Do not allow your
                                                                            child to eat or drink.
                                             Greenish yellow
                                                 vomit

                     ACTION                      None of
                                                the above
              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                If your child is under
              5 years, he or she may                                               Does your
              have intussusception                                                 child have
              (a rare condition
                                                                                   diarrhea?
              causing an intestinal
              obstruction). In older
              children, the cause of                                              No diarrhea
              these symptoms may
              be food poisoning.
              • Do not allow your                                                   Diarrhea
              child to eat or drink.
                                                      ABDOMINAL PAIN (CHILDREN)     125

    Has pain been               Does your                       ACTION
      relieved by               child have                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     either of the              any of the                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      following?                following?                 Recurrent abdominal
                                                           pain in children can
                                                           sometimes be related
        Vomiting                Sore throat                to anxiety.

       Passing gas
                                   Cough
        or stools

         Neither                Runny nose

                                  None of
                                 the above
                                                             Has your child
                                                             suffered from
                                                            similar bouts of
       ACTION                                               abdominal pain
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                             over the past
Young children often           Does your                      few weeks?
have abdominal pain          child have any
in association with a             of the
cold or flu.                   following?                       Previous
• Give your child                                            abdominal pain
liquid acetaminophen
                                Pain when
to relieve pain.
                                 urinating                     No previous
• Inhaling steam from                                             pain
a bowl of hot water
(p.165) may help.              Temperature
                             of 100.4°F (38°C)
!   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
  if your child
develops danger signs
                                 or above

(see box opposite).              Renewed
                                bedwetting
                                or daytime
                                “accidents”

                                  None of                       ACTION
                                 the above                 SEE YOUR DOCTOR
       ACTION                                              WITHIN 24 HOURS
CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                       if you cannot identify
if your child is under                                     a possible cause for
1 year. He or she may                                      your child’s abdominal
have gastroenteritis.                                      pain from this chart.
                                ACTION
• Give older children
plenty of clear fluids     SEE YOUR DOCTOR
to drink.                  WITHIN 24 HOURS
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR        Your child may have a
if an older child is no    urinary tract infection.
better within 24 hours     • Give your child
or if other symptoms       plenty of clear fluids
develop.                   to drink.
126   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Swollen abdomen
      Enlargement of the abdomen is usually due to
                                                                    ACTION
      weight gain or poor muscle tone from lack of
                                                               GO TO ANOTHER CHART
      exercise. A swollen abdomen may also result from a       Abdominal pain
      disorder of either the digestive system or the urinary   (adults), p.120, or
                                                               Abdominal pain
      system. If you have abdominal swelling that has          (children), p.124
      come on rapidly, you should consult your doctor
      irrespective of any other symptoms you may have.
                                                                    ACTION
            How long has                  Do you have          MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
            your abdomen                   abdominal           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
 START                                                         You may be suffering
            been swollen?                    pain?
                                                               from excessive gas or
                                                               constipation, possibly
               Less than                                       due to irritable bowel
                                           Severe pain
               24 hours                                        syndrome.

             Longer than
                                            Mild pain
               24 hours
                                                                  Is the pain
                                             No pain              relieved by
                                                                passing gas or
                                                                having a bowel
              ACTION                                             movement?

         TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
         A swollen abdomen                                           Relieved
         may be the the first
         sign of an unsuspected
         pregnancy, especially           Do any of the
                                                                    Unrelieved
         if you have been using           following
         contraception or if                apply?
         your menstrual periods
         tend to be irregular.
                                           Your ankles
         • If you think that               are swollen              ACTION
         you might be pregnant,
                                                               GO TO ANOTHER CHART
         perform a home
         pregnancy test.                  You could be         Swollen ankles, p.148
                                            pregnant

                                            You have
                                            difficulty              ACTION
                                            urinating
                                                               SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              ACTION                                           WITHIN 24 HOURS
         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                           You urinate         The swelling could be
         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                            only small         due to an abnormally
         if you cannot identify a            volumes           full bladder caused
         possible cause for your                               by a blockage at the
         abdominal swelling                  None of           bladder outlet.
         from this chart.                   the above
                                 SWOLLEN ABDOMEN • ANAL AND RECTAL PROBLEMS             127

   Anal and rectal problems
   The anus is the opening of the lower large intestine
                                                                   ACTION
   (rectum) to the outside. Discomfort during bowel
                                                             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
   movements may be due to a disorder of the rectum,         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   the anus, or the skin around the anus. Rectal or anal     You may have a
                                                             pinworm infestation.
   bleeding is often due to hemorrhoids but can also be
   an early symptom of cancer. Consult your doctor if
   you have any bleeding or persistent discomfort.              Do you have
                                                                either of the
                                                                 following?
            Have you                      ACTION
START        noticed                 SEE YOUR DOCTOR           White “threads”
          bleeding from              WITHIN 24 HOURS            in your feces
            the anus?                Although hemorrhoids
                                     are a likely cause,       Itching is worse
                                     there is a slight         in bed at night
              Bleeding               possibility of cancer
                                     of the colon, rectum,
                                     or anus that needs to          Neither
                                     be excluded.
            No bleeding

                                                                   ACTION
                                                             TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
           Do you have                                       You may have
           either of the                                     hemorrhoids, but
                                        Do you have          itching can also occur
            following?                 itching around        for no obvious reason.

             Pain in or
                                          the anus?          • Try using an over-the-
                                                             counter hemorrhoid
            around the                                       preparation to relieve
          anus or rectum                    Itching          the itching.
                                                             CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
          Sore area in the                                   if the itching continues
           crease above                   No itching         for more than 3 days.
             the anus

               Neither                                             ACTION
                                                             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                             It is possible that you
                                       Do you have
             ACTION                                          have genital warts.
                                      small, irregular,
        SEE YOUR DOCTOR                fleshy lumps
        WITHIN 24 HOURS              around the anus?
        You may have a                                             ACTION
        pilonidal sinus (small                               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
        pit at the top of this                Yes            TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
        crease, which can                                    if you cannot identify a
        result in an abscess).                               possible cause for your
        • Soak the affected                   No             anal or rectal problem
        area in warm water.                                  from this chart.
128    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Diarrhea (adults)
       For children under 12 years, see p.130
       Diarrhea is the frequent passing of abnormally loose         !   Dehydration
                                                                        A person with bad diarrhea
       or watery feces, and is usually a result of infection.           can become dehydrated if
       However, persistent diarrhea may be caused by a                  fluids are not replaced quickly
                                                                        enough. The symptoms of
       serious gastrointestinal disorder. You should consult            dehydration include confusion
       your doctor if diarrhea continues for more than                  or drowsiness, a dry mouth,
                                                                        loss of elasticity in the skin,
       2 days or if it recurs.                                          and failure to urinate for
                                                                        several hours. Elderly people
                                                                        are particularly at risk. Follow
                                                                        the advice for preventing
                  Have you                  Have you had                dehydration on p.165, but
      START     noticed blood               several bouts               seek urgent medical help if a
                in your feces?                of diarrhea               person has severe symptoms.
                                            over the past
                                             few weeks?
                     Blood

                                                   Yes
                   No blood
                                                                            Has the diarrhea
                                                                            been alternating
                                                   No
                                                                             with bouts of
                                                                             constipation?
                   ACTION
              SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              WITHIN 24 HOURS                                                  Constipation
              You may have an                 ACTION                           and diarrhea
              intestinal infection,      MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              such as amebiasis,         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              or ulcerative colitis      You probably have                    Diarrhea alone
              (ulceration of the         irritable bowel
              rectum and colon).         syndrome, especially
              However, the slight        if you have suffered
              possibility of cancer      abdominal pain and
              of the colon or rectum     excessive gas.
              needs to be excluded.      However, the slight
                                         possibility of cancer of
                                                                                 ACTION
                                         the colon or rectum               TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                         needs to be excluded.             You may have food
                                         • Avoid large meals,              poisoning.
              Have you recently          spicy, fried, and fatty
               consumed food             foods, and milk
                                                                           • Follow the advice
                                                                           for preventing
                or water that            products.
                                                                           dehydration (p.165).
               may have been             • Cut down on coffee,             CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                         tea, soda, and beer.
               contaminated?                                               if you are no better in
                                                                           2 days or if any other
                                                                           symptoms develop.
                    Possible

                    Unlikely
                                                     DIARRHEA (ADULTS)       129

 Have the attacks           ACTION                     ACTION
    of diarrhea        SEE YOUR DOCTOR           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
  occurred since       WITHIN 24 HOURS           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
  a visit abroad?      You may have picked       You may have an
                       up an intestinal          intolerance of a specific
                       infection, such as        food or foods.
   Foreign travel      giardiasis, during
                       your travels abroad.

     No foreign
       travel                                          ACTION
                                                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                 Anxiety disorders can
                                                 be a cause of diarrhea.
                        Is your diarrhea
   Do you have
                        associated with
  recurrent pain
                          either of the
   in the lower
                           following?
    abdomen?                                           ACTION
                              Eating             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
          No             particular foods
                                                 Your symptoms may
                                                 be a side effect of the
                         Period of stress        medication.
          Yes
                                                 • Stop taking any over-
                                                 the-counter medicines
                                                 but continue to take
                              Neither
                                                 prescribed medication
                                                 unless advised to stop
                                                 by your doctor.

      ACTION
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
You may have an                                       Are you
intestinal disorder.
                            ACTION                currently taking
                       TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                  any medication?
                       You probably have
                       gastroenteritis or food
                                                      Medication
                       poisoning.
   Do you have         • Follow the advice
                       for preventing
   either of the                                    No medication
                       dehydration (p.165).
    following?
                       CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                       if you are no better in
      Nausea or        2 days or if any other
      vomiting         symptoms develop.
                                                       ACTION
    Temperature
                                                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     of 100.4°F
                                                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
  (38°C) or above                                if you cannot identify
                                                 a possible cause for
                                                 your diarrhea from
       Neither
                                                 this chart.
130    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Diarrhea (children)
           For adults and children over 12, see p.128
       Diarrhea is the abnormally frequent passage of loose         !   Danger signs
                                                                        Dial 911 or call EMS if your
       or watery feces. Breast-fed babies may pass loose                child also has any of
       feces several times a day, and this is normal. If your           the following symptoms:

       child has diarrhea, he or she should drink plenty of             • Abnormal drowsiness.
                                                                        • Severe abdominal pain or
       clear fluids to avoid dehydration. If symptoms do                  abdominal pain that lasts
                                                                          for 4 hours or more.
       not improve, consult your doctor.
                                                                        • No urination during the day
                                                                          for 3 hours (if under 1 year)
                                                                          or 6 hours (in an older
                 How long has                Does your                    child).
      START      your child had            child have any               • Refusal to drink or feed
                   diarrhea?                    of the                    (in babies) for over 6 hours.
                                             following?                 • Blood in the feces.

                    Less than
                     3 days
                                           Abdominal pain

                3 days or more
                                           Temperature of                     Is your child
                                            100.4°F (38°C)                  currently taking
                                              or above                      any medication?
                   ACTION
                                               Vomiting
              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                              Medication
              if your child is under 6
              months. He or she may            None of
              have gastroenteritis.           the above                       No medication
              CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
              if your child is over 6
              months and not better
              within 24 hours or if           ACTION
              any other symptoms         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              develop.                   TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                                  Is your
              • Follow the advice        Persistent constipation
              for preventing             can lead to feces                    child gaining
              dehydration (p.165).       trickling from the anus,              weight and
                                         which may be mistaken                growing at a
                                         for diarrhea.                         normal rate
                                                                               (see growth
                Was your child                                                charts, p.71)?
                 constipated                What is the
               before the onset            appearance of
                 of diarrhea?                                                        Yes
                                             the feces?

                                              Uniformly                               No
                  Constipated
                                               runny

                                           Contains pieces
                Not constipated
                                              of food
                                                      DIARRHEA (CHILDREN)      131

      ACTION                 Was your baby                ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR                given any of          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
WITHIN 24 HOURS               the following          Foods that are new to
Your child’s symptoms        before the onset        your baby may cause
may be a side effect of        of diarrhea?          digestive upsets.
the drug.                                            • Withhold the food
• Stop giving any over-          Unfamiliar
                                                     that seems to be
the-counter medicines                                causing the trouble
but continue to give               foods             for at least 1 week.
prescribed medication                                CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
unless advised to stop         Sugary foods          if your baby is no
by your doctor.                or sweetened          better in 24 hours or
                                   drinks            if he or she develops
                                                     other symptoms.

                                   Neither
     How old is
     your child?

       Under                     ACTION
     12 months
                            SEE YOUR DOCTOR               ACTION
                            WITHIN 24 HOURS
     12 months                                       TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                            if you cannot identify   Sugar in food and
     to 3 years
                            a possible cause for     drink can cause
                            your child’s diarrhea    diarrhea in babies.
    Over 3 years            from this chart.
                                                     • Avoid giving your
                                                     baby sweetened foods
                                                     and drinks.
                                                     CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
      ACTION                   Is your child         if your baby is no
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES         experiencing          better in 24 hours or
                                                     if he or she develops
Young children often          unusual stress,
fail to chew and digest                              other symptoms.
                                anxiety, or
food properly, which           excitement?
can lead to so-called
“toddler’s diarrhea.”
                                  Stress or
• Follow the advice
for preventing                     anxiety
dehydration (p.165).
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                 Excitement               ACTION
if symptoms persist or
if your child develops                               TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
other symptoms.                                      Psychological stress or
                                   Neither
                                                     unusual excitement
                                                     can cause diarrhea in
                                                     children. The symptoms
      ACTION                                         will normally stop as
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                  soon as the cause has
                                 ACTION              disappeared.
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
It is possible that your    SEE YOUR DOCTOR          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
child has a condition       WITHIN 24 HOURS          if there is a long-term
affecting the digestive     if you cannot identify   cause of anxiety in
tract, such as food         a possible cause for     your child’s life or if
intolerance or celiac       your child’s diarrhea    he or she develops
disease (gluten allergy).   from this chart.         other symptoms.
132    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Constipation
       Some people have a bowel movement once or twice
       a day; others do so less frequently. If you have fewer        !   Blood in the feces
                                                                         Blood can appear in the feces
       bowel movements than usual or if your feces are                   as red streaks or in larger
       small and hard, you are constipated. The cause is                 amounts. It can also make
                                                                         the stools look black. Small
       often a lack of fluid or fiber-rich foods in the diet.            amounts of blood in the
       If constipation occurs suddenly or persists despite               feces are usually caused by
                                                                         minor anal problems, such as
       a change in your diet, consult your doctor.                       hemorrhoids, but you should
                                                                         always consult your doctor if
                                                                         you notice blood in the feces
                                                                         because it is vital that other
                   How long                  Do you have                 causes, such as colorectal
      START        have you                   pain in your               cancer, are excluded.
                 suffered from              rectum or anus
                 constipation?                 when you
                                               defecate?
                   For a few                                                   Do you have
                  weeks or less                                                intermittent
                                                   Pain                          bouts of
                  For several                                                 cramping pain
                months or years                                                in the lower
                                                 No pain
                                                                                abdomen?

                Does either of
                                               ACTION                                Pain
                the following
                   apply?                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                                   No pain
                 You regularly            Pain on defecation
                                          can cause or worsen
                  ignore the
                                          constipation. You may
                    urge to               have hemorrhoids or
                   defecate               an anal fissure (tear in               ACTION
                                          the lining of the anus).
                                                                           TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                 You regularly
                                                                           Your constipation is
                 use stimulant
                                                                           probably due to a lack
                   laxatives                   ACTION                      of fiber or fluid in
                                          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES           your diet and possibly
                     Neither              Your bowel reflexes              to lack of exercise.
                                          may have become                  • Include more fiber-
                                          sluggish as a result of          rich foods in your diet.
                                          being ignored.                   • Avoid eating too
                   ACTION                 • Include more fiber-            much processed food.
              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                          rich foods in your diet.         • Increase your daily
              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR          • Increase your daily            fluid intake.
              Regular use of              fluid intake.                    • Do not ignore the
              stimulant laxatives,        CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR              urge to defecate.
              such as senna, can          if your symptoms have            CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
              seriously disrupt the       not improved within              if your symptoms have
              normal functioning          2 weeks.                         not improved within
              of the bowels.                                               2 weeks.
                                                                  CONSTIPATION   133

     ACTION                                                ACTION
                            Are you taking
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                   MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           any medication?
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
Irritable bowel                                       Your symptoms may
syndrome is a possible                                be a side effect of the
cause, especially if           Medication             medication.
your constipation                                     • Stop taking any over-
alternates with bouts                                 the-counter medicines
of diarrhea. However,        No medication            but continue to take
other causes, such as                                 prescribed medication
cancer of the colon,                                  unless advised to stop
rectum, or anus, may                                  by your doctor.
need to be ruled out.
                             Do any of the
                              following
                                apply?
                                                           ACTION
                                 You are
   Do you have                  pregnant              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                      Constipation is quite
    any of the
                                                      common in pregnancy.
    following?              You have been
                           drinking less fluid        • Include more fiber-
                                                      rich foods in your diet.
                               than usual
       Fatigue                                        • Avoid eating too
                                                      much processed food.
                           You have changed
 Increased dryness             your diet              • Increase your daily
                                                      fluid intake, but avoid
   or roughness                                       caffeine and alcohol.
     of the skin                 None of
                                the above
                                                      • Do not ignore the
                                                      urge to defecate.
  Feeling the cold                                    CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
   more than you                                      if your symptoms have
      used to                   ACTION                not improved within
                                                      2 weeks.
                          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
    Unexplained
                          Lack of fluid in the
    weight gain           bowel as a result of an
                          inadequate fluid intake
    General hair          or excessive fluid loss
     thinning
                                                           ACTION
                          can cause constipation.
                          • Drink plenty of           TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
       None of            fluids, especially if the   A change in your
      the above           weather is hot.             regular diet, especially
                          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                      when traveling, can
                          if your symptoms have       make you constipated.
                          not improved within         • Include more fiber-
                          2 weeks.                    rich foods in your diet.
                                                      • Avoid eating too
     ACTION                                           much processed food.
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                ACTION
                                                      • Increase your daily
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                    fluid intake.
Hypothyroidism            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT         • Do not ignore the
(underactivity of the     TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR          urge to defecate.
thyroid gland, which      if you cannot identify      CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
causes many body          a possible cause for        if your symptoms have
functions to slow         your constipation from      not improved within
down) is a possibility.   this chart.                 2 weeks.
134    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Chest pain
       Pain in the chest, or any discomfort felt in the front
                                                                             ACTION
       or back of the ribcage, is most often due to minor
       disorders such as muscle strain or indigestion.
       However, you should dial 911 or call EMS if you
                                                                      !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                        You may have a
                                                                      blood clot in the lung.
       have a crushing pain in the center or left side of your
       chest, if you are also short of breath or feel faint, or
       if the pain is unlike any pain you have had before.                 Do any of the
                                                                            following
                                                                              apply?
                  What kind of
                                              Are you short
      START        pain are you                                               You have
                                               of breath?
                  experiencing?                                             recently had
                                                                               surgery
                      Crushing               Short of breath
                                                                       You have recently
                                                                        been immobile
                Spreading from                   Not short               due to injury
               the center of the                 of breath                 or illness
               chest to the neck,
                 arms, or jaw                                             You have had a
                                                                          baby within the
                     Neither of                                            past 2 weeks
                     the above
                                                                              None of
                                                ACTION
                                                                             the above
                                           CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                           Recurrent chest pain
                   Does the pain           could be an indication
                   subside after           of angina, especially if
                   you rest for a          pain in the chest occurs       Is pain related
                   few minutes?            with exertion and               to breathing?
                                           disappears with rest.

                    Pain subsides                                            Related to
                                                                             breathing

                    Pain persists                                            Not related
                                                                            to breathing
                                              Have you had
                                                this pain
                                                 before?
                     ACTION                                                  ACTION
                                                 Previous
              !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                You may be having a
              heart attack.
                                             episodes of this
                                              kind of pain
                                                                      !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                        You may be having a
                                                                      heart attack.
              • While waiting, chew                                   • While waiting, chew
              half an aspirin, unless                                 half an aspirin, unless
              you are allergic to it.          Never before
                                                                      you are allergic to it.
                                                                 CHEST PAIN   135

 Do you have                                           ACTION
  a fever – a                                   CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
temperature of                                  You may have a chest
 100.4°F (38°C)          ACTION                 infection, such as
  or above?                                     pneumonia.
                   CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                   You may have a
                                                • Take an analgesic
                                                such as acetaminophen
                   partially collapsed lung.    to reduce fever and
     Fever
                                                chest pain.
                                                • Drink lots of fluid.
   No fever
                      Does either of
                      the following
                         apply?

                       You have had
                       a chest injury                  ACTION
                                                TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                      You have been             You have probably
                        exercising              strained and/or bruised
 Is the chest                                   a muscle.
sore to touch?
                           Neither
                                                • Take an analgesic
                                                such as acetaminophen
                                                and rest for 24 hours.
 Sore to touch                                  CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                if the pain has not
                                                improved after this time.
   Not sore
   to touch
                         ACTION
                   SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                   WITHIN 24 HOURS
                   You may have a lung
                   infection or pleurisy.
                   • Take an analgesic
                   such as acetaminophen               ACTION
                   to relieve pain and fever.
                                                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
Does the pain      • If you have a fever,       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
 have any of       drink lots of fluid.         if you cannot identify
the following                                   a possible cause for
  features?                                     your chest pain from
                                                this chart.
   Related to
  eating or to           ACTION
particular foods
                   MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                   TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
  Relieved by      You may have
   antacids        recurrent indigestion
                   or heartburn caused                 ACTION
 Brought on        by acid reflux.
by bending or
 lying down
                                                !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                  You may be having
                                                a heart attack.
                                                • While waiting, chew
   None of                                      half an aspirin, unless
  the above                                     you are allergic to it.
136   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Palpitations
      Abnormally fast or irregular heartbeats, or
                                                                   ACTION
      palpitations, are often caused by anxiety or by
                                                              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
      stimulants, such as caffeine and nicotine.              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      Palpitations may also occur as a side effect of         You may have
                                                              hyperthyroidism (an
      medication or because of a heart disorder. Call your    overactive thyroid
      doctor immediately if palpitations are frequent or      gland) or you might be
                                                              suffering from anxiety.
      persistent or if you have other symptoms.

                                                                   ACTION
             Do you have                 Do you have
                                                              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
 START        any of the                  any of the          These symptoms may
              following?                  following?          be due to anxiety.
                                                              • Try some relaxation
             Shortness of                 Weight loss         exercises (p.169).
               breath                    with increased       CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                            appetite          if your symptoms
                                                              continue for 2 days.
                 Chest
              discomfort                    Feeling
                                            on edge
             Feeling faint                                         ACTION
            or passing out                  Increased         TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                            sweating          • Avoid caffeine and
                None of                                       nicotine because these
               the above                                      can disturb your
                                          Bulging eyes        heart rhythm.
                                                              CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                              if your symptoms
               ACTION                       None of           continue for 2 days.
                                           the above
         !serious
           DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
            You may have a
                  arrhythmia                                    Have you been
         (abnormal heart                 Do any of the
         rate or rhythm) due
                                                                 feeling tense
                                          following               or stressed?
         to an underlying
         heart disorder.                    apply?
                                                                 Feeling under
                                         You have had a              stress
               ACTION                   lot of coffee, tea,
                                             or soda              No increase
         SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                   in stress
         WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                         You have been
         Your symptoms may
                                         smoking more
         be a side effect of the
         medication.                       than usual              ACTION
         • Stop taking any over-         You are taking       MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
         the-counter medicines                                TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         but continue to take             medications         if you cannot identify
         prescribed medication                                a possible cause for
         unless advised to stop           None of the         your palpitations from
         by your doctor.                    above             this chart.
                                             PALPITATIONS • POOR BLADDER CONTROL                     137

   Poor bladder control
   If urinating is painful, see p.138
   Inability to control urination may result in leakage          !   Inability to urinate
                                                                        .
                                                                     Inability to urinate, even
   of urine or difficulty urinating. These symptoms                  though the bladder is full,
   may be due to a bladder, nerve, or muscle disorder.               is a serious symptom. It
                                                                     may be the result of an
   In men, an enlarged prostate gland is a common                    obstruction or damage
   cause. Urinary tract infections can also cause                    to nerves that supply the
                                                                     bladder, or it may be a
   leakage of urine, especially in elderly people.                   side effect of certain drugs.
                                                                     You should call your
                                                                     doctor immediately.

               Are you                    ACTION
START         female or             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                male?               TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                    You may be suffering                  ACTION
                                    from an irritable bladder.
                                                                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                Female                                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                 Some drugs, particularly
                                                                 those that act on urine
                 Male                   Do you have              production or on the
                                        either of the            nervous system, can
                                         following?              affect bladder control.
                                                                 • Stop taking any over-
                                                                 the-counter medicines
                                        A strong urge
                                                                 but continue to take
                                       to urinate with           prescribed medication
              ACTION                 little urine passed         unless advised to stop
        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                      by your doctor.
        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR           Leakage of urine
        You may have an              when you cough,
        enlarged prostate gland,      sneeze, or run
        especially if you are
        over 55, or a narrowing                                          Are you
        of the urethra (tube that           Neither                  currently taking
        empties the bladder).                                        any medication?

                                          ACTION                         Medication
                                    TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
           Do you have
                                    You probably have
           either of the            stress incontinence.               No medication
            following?
                                    • Try Kegel exercises:
                                    contract, hold, and
              Difficulty            relax pelvic floor
             starting to            muscles 10 times,
                                    several times a day
               urinate
                                    to strengthen them.
                                                                          ACTION
                                    CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR          MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
            Weak urinary            if the condition does not    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              stream                improve in 1 month.          if you cannot identify
                                                                 a possible cause for
                                                                 your poor bladder
               Neither
                                                                 control from this chart.
138    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Painful urination
       Pain or discomfort while urinating is usually caused
       by inflammation of the urinary tract, often due to            Checking the
                                                                     appearance of urine
       infection. Frequent painless urination can be due             The appearance of urine varies
       to diabetes or kidney problems and should be                  considerably. For example,
                                                                     urine is often darker in the
       investigated by your doctor. Discolored urine can             morning than later in the day.
       accompany this type of pain but may not indicate              Some drugs and foods may
                                                                     also cause a temporary color
       disease (see Checking the appearance of urine, right).        change in the urine. Beets,
                                                                     for example, may turn the
                                                                     urine red. A change in your
                                                                     urine can indicate a disorder.
                Do you have                    ACTION                Very dark urine may be a
      START     either of the            CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW        sign of liver disease, such as
                 following?              You may have                acute hepatitis, while red or
                                         pyelonephritis (infection   cloudy urine may be due to
                                         of the kidneys).            bleeding or an infection
               Pain in the back                                      in the kidney or bladder.
                  just above             • Take an analgesic         •  If you are not sure about
                   the waist             such as acetaminophen.
                                                                     the cause of a change in the
                                                                     appearance of your urine,
               A temperature                                         consult your doctor.
                  of 100.4°F
               (38°C) or above

                                            Do you have
                   Neither                   any of the                       ACTION
                                             following?
                                                                         SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                         WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                               Lower
                                                                         You may have cystitis.
                                           abdominal pain
                                                                         • Take an analgesic
                                                                         such as acetaminophen.
                                                Blood in
                                               the urine                 • Drink 1 pint (500 ml)
               Have you felt                                             of fluid every hour for
                                                                         4 hours.
                the need to
               urinate more                  Cloudy urine                • Drinking cranberry
                                                                         juice may help relieve
                 frequently                                              the burning sensation.
                than usual?                     None of
                                               the above
                  Increased
                  frequency
                                                                               Are you
                No increased
                                                                              female or
                 frequency
                                                                                male?

                                                                                Female

                                                                                 Male
                                                        PAINFUL URINATION       139

      Have you               Do you have                  ACTION
       noticed                an unusual            TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
    soreness or                 vaginal             You may have vaginal
   itching in the             discharge?            thrush.
   genital area?                                    • If you have had
                              Thick, white          thrush before, try using
                                                    an over-the-counter
                               discharge
      Soreness                                      antifungal preparation
                                                    recommended by
                            Yellowish green         your pharmacist.
                               discharge            CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
       Itching
                                                    if this is the first time
                               No unusual           you have had these
                                discharge           symptoms.
       Neither

                               ACTION
                          MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     ACTION               TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR              ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR           if you cannot identify
WITHIN 24 HOURS           a possible cause for      SEE YOUR DOCTOR
You may have cystitis.    your symptoms from        WITHIN 24 HOURS
                          this chart.               or go to a clinic that
• Take an analgesic                                 specializes in sexually
such as acetaminophen.
                                                    transmitted diseases.
• Drink 1 pint (500 ml)                             You may have a
of fluid every hour for                             vaginal infection, such
4 hours.                                            as bacterial vaginosis
• Drinking cranberry                                or trichomoniasis, or
juice may help relieve                              an STD, such as
the burning sensation.                              gonorrhea.
                               ACTION
                          SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                          WITHIN 24 HOURS
                          or go to a clinic that
                          specializes in sexually
                          transmitted diseases.
                          You may have an STD,
                          such as gonorrhea or
   Do you have            nongonococcal
                          urethritis.
    an unusual
  discharge from
    your penis?                                           ACTION
                                                    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     Discharge                                      TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                    if you cannot identify
                                                    a possible cause for
                                                    your symptoms from
   No discharge
                                                    this chart.
140    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Back pain
       Mild back pain is usually caused by poor posture,
       sudden movement, or lifting heavy objects, all               !   Danger signs
                                                                        Dial 911 or call EMS if you
       of which may strain the back. Back pain is also                  have back pain that is
       common in pregnancy. Persistent or severe back                   associated with one of
                                                                        the following symptoms:
       pain may be the result of a more serious problem.
                                                                        • Difficulty controlling
       You should consult your doctor if pain is severe                   your bladder.
       or does not improve after 48 hours.                              • Difficulty controlling
                                                                          your bowels.
                                                                        • Sudden pain above waist
                                                                          with shortness of breath.
                Did the pain               Do you have                  • Difficulty moving.
      START     in your back               either of the
               come on after                following?
                either of the
                 following?                                                   Did the pain
                                          Pain in the back
                                           just above the
                                                                             occur after any
                                                waist                       of the following?
              An injury or fall
                                          A temperature                          Lifting a
                 A sudden,                   of 100.4°F                        heavy weight
                 awkward                  (38°C) or above
                 movement                                                      A coughing fit
                                               Neither
                  Neither                                                      Strenuous or
                                                                                  unusual
                                                                              physical activity

                                              ACTION                              None of
                                                                                 the above
                                        CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                        You may have
                                        pyelonephritis (infection
                                        of the kidneys).                         ACTION
                                        • Take an analgesic                 TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                        such as acetaminophen.              You have probably
                                                                            strained a back muscle
                 Have you                                                   and/or bruised your
              noticed either of                                             back by overstretching
                                                                            a muscle.
               the following?
                                              ACTION                        • Rest and take
                                                                            analgesic such as
                 Difficulty             CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                                                                            acetaminophen.
                moving a leg            You may have pinched
                                        a nerve in your back or             • Place a covered hot-
                                                                            water bottle or heat
                                        damaged your spine.
                Numbness or                                                 pad against your back
              tingling in a leg                                             for additional relief.
                                                                            CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                 Neither of                                                 if you are no better
                 the above                                                  within 24 hours.
                                                                       BACK PAIN   141

  Does either of               ACTION                      ACTION
  the following          SEE YOUR DOCTOR             MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     apply?              WITHIN 24 HOURS             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                         You may have                You may have
  Pain makes any         fractured a vertebra as     osteoarthritis.
                         a result of osteoporosis
    movement
                         or have sciatica, caused
      difficult          by a slipped disk.

    Pain shoots
  from the spine                                           ACTION
  down the back                                      MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
     of the leg                                      TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                     You may have
                                                     ankylosing spondylitis
       Neither                 How old
                                                     (a form of arthritis
                               are you?              affecting the back of the
                                                     pelvis and the vertebrae
                                                     of the spine), especially
                               45 or over            if you are male.

     ACTION
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                               Under 45
You have probably
strained some of the                                       ACTION
muscles or sprained
                                                     CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
some of the ligaments
in your back.                                        New back pain or a
                                                     worsening of existing
• Take an analgesic                                  back pain may indicate
such as acetaminophen.
                               ACTION                the start of labor.
• Place a covered hot-
water bottle or a heat   SEE YOUR DOCTOR
pad against your back    WITHIN 24 HOURS
to ease the pain.        You may have
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR      fractured a vertebra as
if you do not feel any   a result of osteoporosis.
better in 2 or 3 days                                  Are you in the
or if any other                                        last 3 months
symptoms develop.                                      of pregnancy?

                                                           Pregnant
                           Does either of
                           the following
  Have you been               apply?                    Not pregnant
   suffering from
  increasing pain
    and stiffness          You are over 60
     for several
      months?             You have recently                ACTION
                           been immobile
                                                     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                            due to illness
         Yes                                         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                              or injury              if you cannot identify
                                                     a possible cause for
                                                     your back pain from
          No                    Neither              this chart.
142    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Neck pain or stiffness
       Pain and/or stiffness in the neck is usually due to
       a minor problem that does not require treatment,               !   Danger signs
                                                                          Dial 911 or call EMS if you
       such as a muscle strain or a ligament sprain.                      have neck pain associated
       However, if the pain occurs with fever, meningitis is              with any of the following:

       a possibility. Neck pain or stiffness becomes more                 • Difficulty controlling
                                                                            your bladder.
       common as people grow older; and may then be                       • Difficulty controlling
                                                                            your bowels.
       due to a disorder of the neck bones and joints.
                                                                          • Severe headache.
                                                                          • Drowsiness or confusion.

               How long have                  Have you
                                                                          • Dislike of bright light.

      START     you had pain              jolted or injured
               and/or stiffness            your neck, for
                in the neck?              example in a car
                                          accident or fall?
                    Less than
                    24 hours
                                              Neck injury
                    24 hours
                    or longer
                                            No neck injury

                                                                                     ACTION
                 Which of the
                                             Have you
                  following
                describes your             noticed any of                     !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                                You may have
                                                                              damaged your spine.
                 symptoms?                 the following?
                                                                              • Follow the first-aid
                                                                              advice for spinal
               Pain and stiffness          Pain, numbness,                    injuries (p.46).
                worsening over             or tingling in an
                 many months                  arm or leg

                 Neck pain with            Difficulty moving                         ACTION
               numbness or pain             an arm or leg
                                                                              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                in the arm/hand             Loss of bladder                   Your neck is probably
                                                control                       strained and/or bruised
                                                                              from overstretching
                     Neither
                                                None of                       a muscle.
                                               the above                      • Take an analgesic
                                                                              such as acetaminophen
                                                                              and rest lying down.
                   ACTION
                                               ACTION
                                                                              • A heat pad or
              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                             covered hot-water
              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                  bottle placed against
              You may have               TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                   your neck may provide
              osteoarthritis of the      if you cannot identify               additional pain relief.
              upper spine, especially    a possible cause for                 CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
              if you are over the        your neck pain or                    if you are no better in
              age of 45.                 stiffness from this chart.           24 hours.
                                                        NECK PAIN OR STIFFNESS     143

      Do you have                                             ACTION
       any of the                                        SEE YOUR DOCTOR
       following?                                        WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                         Your neck pain may
       Temperature                                       be due to pressure
                                                         on a nerve as a result
        of 100.4°F            Does either of             of a slipped disk or
     (38°C) or above
                              the following              osteoarthritis of the
                                 apply?                  upper spine.
         Severe
        headache
                               Pain is severe
       Drowsiness               enough to
      or confusion                prevent
                                movement
                                                              ACTION
        Dislike of
       bright light             Pain shoots              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                 down one                You may have strained
                                 arm from                your neck over-
        Nausea or
                                                         stretching a muscle.
        vomiting                  the neck
                                                         • Rest your neck as
                                                         much as possible by
         None of                                         lying down.
                                   Neither
        the above
                                                         • Take a nonsteroidal
                                                         anti-inflammatory drug,
                                                         such as ibuprofen, to
                                                         ease the pain.
                                                         • Keeping your neck
                                                         warm with a heating
                            Can you feel any             pad or covered hot-
        ACTION                tenderness or              water bottle may help.
                                                         CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                             swelling at the
!   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
  You may have
meningitis (infection
                            sides or the back
                               of the neck?
                                                         if you are no better in
                                                         3 days.

inflaming membranes
around the brain).
                                     Yes

                                      No                  Did either of the
                                                          following apply
                                                           in the 24 hours
                                                          before the onset
        ACTION
                                                               of pain?
GO TO ANOTHER CHART
Lumps and swellings,
                                                            You exercised
p.80
                                                              unusually
                                                             strenuously
                                 ACTION
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT             You sat or slept
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR              in an awkward
                           if you cannot identify              position
                           a possible cause for
                           your neck pain or
                           stiffness from this chart.           Neither
144   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Arm or hand pain
      If you have joint pain, see p.146
                                                                  ACTION
      Pain in the arm or hand is often caused by injury
                                                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
      or a problem in the neck or shoulder. Rarely, pain   TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      in the arm is due to a heart attack or a serious     You may have repetitive
                                                           strain injury.
      neck disorder. Consult your doctor if the pain is
                                                           • Take an analgesic
      severe, recurrent, or persistent.                    such as acetaminophen.

            Did the pain
            start during                 Is the pain
 START      or soon after                                         ACTION
                                         associated
            either of the                with any of
             following?                the following?      !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                             You may be having
                                                           a heart attack.
                                                           • While waiting, chew
           An injury or fall           Chest tightness     half an aspirin, unless
                                                           you are allergic to it.

              Repetitive                  Shortness
             arm or hand                  of breath
             movements
                                      Nausea, sweating,           ACTION
                                       or feeling faint
                Neither                                    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                           None of         You may have
                                          the above        inflammation of a
                                                           tendon or polymyalgia,
              ACTION                                       in which muscles
         CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                              become inflamed,
         if you are in severe            What are          particularly if you are
         pain. You may have             the features       over 60 years old.
         either fractured a bone        of the pain?
         or damaged a muscle.
         • Follow the first-aid       Localized in upper
         advice for a broken
         arm (p.44).                  arms or shoulders
                                                                  ACTION
         TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
         if not in severe pain.         Extends from       SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                        the wrist into     WITHIN 24 HOURS
         • Follow the first-aid                            You may have a pinched
         advice for sprains and         the palm and
         strains (p.47).                                   nerve in your neck.
                                         lower arm

                                        Shoots down
                                        the length of             ACTION
              ACTION
                                          the arm
         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                          None of
         You may have a                                    if you cannot identify
         compressed nerve in
                                         the above         a possible cause for
         the wrist (carpal                                 your arm or hand pain
         tunnel syndrome).                                 from this chart.
                                                         ARM OR HAND PAIN • LEG PAIN        145

   Leg pain
   If you have joint pain, see p.146
                                                                      ACTION
   Leg pain due to a strained muscle or torn ligament
                                                                 SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   usually goes away without treatment. Pain may                 WITHIN 24 HOURS
   also result from a problem in the lower back or               Your symptoms may
                                                                 be caused by cellulitis
   in the blood vessels in the leg. If your leg is also          (infection of the skin
   swollen, hot, or red, see your doctor at once.                and underlying
                                                                 tissue) or superficial
                                                                 thrombophlebitis
                                                                 (inflamed surface vein).
           Did the pain                 ACTION
          start during or
START       soon after
                                   TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                   You may have strained              ACTION
           either of the           a muscle.
            following?             • Follow the first-aid        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                   advice for sprains and
                                   strains (p.47).               You may have a muscle
                                                                 cramp, but, if the pain
          An injury or fall                                      occurs with exercise
                                                                 and disappears with
                                                                 rest, you may have
               Unusual                                           claudication due to
                                      What are the
               exercise                                          narrowing of the blood
                                       features of               vessels in the leg.
                                        the pain?
               Neither
                                      Affects a small                 ACTION
                                     area that is also
                                       red and hot               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
             ACTION                 Sudden tightening            Varicose veins are a
                                                                 possible cause.
        CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW          of calf muscles
        if you are in severe
        pain. You may have          Constant pain in
        either fractured a bone      the calf, which                Does sitting
        or damaged a muscle.        may be swollen                down with your
        • Follow the first-aid                                     feet up relieve
        advice for a broken          Shooting pain
        leg (p.45).                                                   the pain?
                                     down the back
        TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES         of the leg
        if not in severe pain.
                                                                          Yes
        • Follow the first-aid           Heavy,
        advice for sprains and         aching legs
        strains (p.47).                                                    No
                                         None of
                                        the above
                                                                      ACTION
             ACTION
                                                                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
        CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW                                     TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
        You may have deep               ACTION
                                                                 if you cannot identify
        vein thrombosis            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT           a possible cause for
        (blood clot in a vein      TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR            your leg pain from this
        in your leg).              You may have sciatica.        chart.
146    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Joint pain
       If your ankle is swollen painlessly, see p.148
                                                                         How many
       Pain in a joint may be caused by injury or strain
                                                                          joints are
       and often disappears without a cause being found.                  affected?
       Gout or a joint infection can cause a joint to
       become red, hot, and swollen. Joint pain may also                  One joint
       be a reaction to an infection or due to arthritis.
       Consult your doctor if pain is severe or persistent.
                                                                       More than one

                    Have you                 Do you have
      START          injured                 either of the
                    the joint?                following?                  ACTION
                                                                    CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
                       Injury                 Hot joint(s)          You may have septic
                                                                    arthritis (infected joint)
                                                                    or gout.
                    No injury                 Red joint(s)          • Rest the painful joint.
                                                                    • Take ibuprofen at the
                                                                    recommended intervals.
                                                 Neither            • Drink lots of fluid.
                 Does either of
                 the following
                    apply?
                                                                       Does moving
                  You cannot
                 move the joint                ACTION                 the joint affect
                                                                         the pain?
                                          CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
               The joint appears          You may have fractured
                 misshapen or             a bone, strained or           Considerably
                    swollen               torn a muscle, or torn         worsens it
                                          a ligament.
                                          • Follow the first-aid      Slightly worsens
                      Neither             advice for a broken arm     it or no change
                                          or leg (pp.44–45).

                    ACTION
                                               ACTION                 Did the pain
              TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES                                    come on
              You have probably           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                     gradually over
              strained a ligament         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                          You may have
                                                                    months or years?
              around the joint.
              • Follow the first-aid      osteoarthritis.
              advice for sprains and      • Take an analgesic                 Yes
              strains (p.47).             such as acetaminophen.
              CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR         • Put a covered hot-
              if the joint is no better   water bottle or heating
                                                                               No
              in 24 hours.                pad on the joint.
                                                                       JOINT PAIN   147

     Have you                                               ACTION
   recently had                                        SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   either of the                                       WITHIN 24 HOURS
    following?                                         Some viral illnesses,
                                                       such as rubella
                                ACTION                 (German measles),
    An infection
                                                       can cause joint pain,
    with a rash           SEE YOUR DOCTOR              but if you have been
                          WITHIN 24 HOURS              bitten by a tick, an
    An infection          Certain bacterial            infection such as Lyme
   without a rash         infections of the            disease could be the
                          intestines and genital       cause of the pain.
                          tract can lead to
       Neither            reactive arthritis (short-
                          term inflammation
                          of the joint).

     ACTION
SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                          Is the problem
WITHIN 24 HOURS                                              in a child
You may have                                                under 12?
rheumatoid arthritis.           ACTION
• Take an analgesic
such as ibuprofen.        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                Under 12
                          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                          You may have a frozen
                          shoulder.                         12 or over
    Which joint           • Take an analgesic
                          such as acetaminophen
    or joints are         to ease the pain.
     affected?            • Rest your shoulder.
      Shoulder
                                                            ACTION
                                                       SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         Hip
                                                       WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                       Most childhood hip
                                ACTION                 problems are not
        Neck                                           serious, but some need
                          TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                       prompt treatment to
                          Your symptoms are
                                                       prevent lasting damage
   Other joint(s)         probably a result of
                                                       to the joint.
                          overuse, although
                          recent viral illness may
                          also be the cause.
                          • Rest the painful
     ACTION               joint(s).

GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                          • Take an analgesic
                          such as acetaminophen
Neck pain or stiffness,   to ease the pain.
                                                            ACTION
p.142                                                  MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                          CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                          if your condition is no      TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                          better in 2 days.            if you cannot identify
                                                       a possible cause for
                                                       your joint pain from
                                                       this chart.
148    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Swollen ankles
           If you have a painful swollen ankle, see p.146
       Slight, painless swelling of the ankles is most often               Are you
       caused by fluid accumulating in the tissues after long             pregnant?
       periods of sitting or standing still, but it may be due
       to heart, liver, or kidney disorders. Ankle swelling is             Pregnant
       common during pregnancy. If swelling persists or if
       you have other symptoms, consult your doctor.
                                                                        Not pregnant

                   Are both                 Have you been
      START         ankles                  suffering from
                   affected?                  increased
                                             shortness of
                                               breath?
                  Both ankles

                                                Shortness
                   One ankle                    of breath

                                              No shortness
                                               of breath
                                                                           ACTION
                                                                     TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                 Is the calf of                                      Swelling can persist or
                 the affected                                        recur for several weeks
                 leg either of                 ACTION                following an injury.
                the following?            SEE YOUR DOCTOR            • If the injury occurred
                                          WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                                                     within the past 2 days,
                                          You may be suffering       follow the first-aid
                     Swollen              from heart failure, in     advice for sprains and
                                          which fluid accumulates    strains (p.47).
                                          around the body. Other     • For a less recently
                     Tender               possible causes are a      sustained injury, try
                                          liver or kidney problem.   resting the limb for
                                                                     48 hours.
                     Neither                                         CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                     if swelling persists
                                                                     despite rest or if the
                                                                     ankle is painful,
                                           Have you injured          tender, or inflamed.
                                              your ankle
                   ACTION                   within the past
                                             few weeks?
              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
              You may have deep vein
              thrombosis (blood clot
                                             Recent injury
              in a vein in your leg).

                                            No recent injury
                                                               SWOLLEN ANKLES     149

  Does either of                 ACTION                      ACTION
  the following            CALL YOUR DOCTOR             TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
     apply?                NOW Retaining                You may have varicose
                           excessive amounts            veins, which can cause
    Your face or           of fluid may be a            fluid to accumulate in
                           symptom of pre-              the ankles.
     fingers are
                           eclampsia, which, if         • Avoid standing still
       swollen             severe, can be serious.      for long periods.
 You have gained                                        • Walk as much as
                                                        possible.
 over 5 lb (2.3 kg)
 in the past week                                       • When sitting down,
                                                        try to keep your feet
                                                        raised above hip level.
       Neither                   ACTION                 • Wear support hose.
                                                        CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                           TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                        if the swelling worsens
                           Swollen ankles are           or if other symptoms
                           common during                develop.
                           pregnancy, particularly
                           in the last 3 months.
 Did your ankles
 become swollen            • Avoid standing still
                           for long periods.
 during either of
  the following?
                           • Put your feet up
                           whenever possible.
                           CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
    A long train,          if your face and/or             Do you have
   car, or bus trip        fingers become swollen           prominent
                           or if you start to put         veins in one or
                           on weight rapidly.
   Airplane flight                                           both legs
                                                            affected by
                                                             swelling?
       Neither                   ACTION
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT            Prominent veins
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                           Your symptom may be
                           a side effect of the drug.      No prominent
                                                               veins
     ACTION                • Stop taking any over-
                           the-counter medicines
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES     but continue to take
Hours of inactivity will   prescribed medication
lead to accumulation of    unless advised to stop
fluid in the ankles and    by your doctor.
increases the risk of
developing a blood clot.
                                                             ACTION
• Clear excess fluid by
taking a brisk walk.                                    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
• Avoid sitting or              Are you                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
standing still for          currently taking            if you cannot identify
long periods.               any medication?             a possible cause for
• When seated, keep                                     your swollen ankles
your legs raised.                                       from this chart.
                                Medication

                              No medication
150   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Erectile dysfunction
      Occasional incidences of erectile dysfunction, or
      failure to have or maintain an erection, are not that
      uncommon. Difficulties are usually caused by factors
                                                                 !   Nonmedical advice
                                                                     Treatment from a
                                                                     nonmedical source could
      such as stress, fatigue, anxiety, or alcohol. Physical         result in the incorrect
      causes are not common. If erectile dysfunction                 diagnosis being made
                                                                     or the wrong treatment
      occurs frequently, consult your doctor for advice.             given. It is important that
                                                                     you consult a doctor, who
      Safe and effective treatments are available.                   can rule out any medical
                                                                     cause of your erection
                                                                     problems, before having
                                                                     any form of treatment.
               Are you                  How often do
 START        interested                 you fail to
                in sex?                  achieve or
                                         maintain an
                                          erection?                       ACTION
                  Yes
                                                                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                             Only                TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                          occasionally           Certain illnesses, such
                   No
                                                                 as diabetes, can lead
                                                                 to erectile problems.
                                           Frequently            Some drugs, including
                                                                 those prescribed for
                                                                 high blood pressure
                                                                 and antidepressants,
                                           ACTION                can also have an effect
                                                                 on sexual performance.
                                      CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
              ACTION                  if you are concerned
                                      about any problems
         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT          with your sexual
         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR           performance. Most              Are you currently
         Lack of interest in          men have occasional
                                      erection problems,                  receiving
         sex is likely to reduce
         your ability to achieve      most likely due to               treatment for
         an erection.                 anxiety – for example              an illness?
                                      at the beginning of a
                                      new sexual relationship
                                      – or due to factors such            Treatment
                                      as fatigue or drinking
                                      too much alcohol.
                                                                       No treatment

              ACTION                     Do you wake
                                          up with an
         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT               erection?                      ACTION
         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         Anxiety about your                                      MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
         sexual performance                Sometimes             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         is the most likely                                      if you cannot identify
         explanation for your                                    a possible cause for
         problem. A physical                                     your erection problem
                                              Never
         cause is unlikely.                                      from this chart.
                           ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION • TESTES AND SCROTUM PROBLEMS               151

   Testes/scrotum problems
   Check regularly for lumps or swellings in the testes,
                                                                       ACTION
   the sperm-producing organs, and the scrotum, the
   sac containing the testes (see Testes: self-examination,
   p.69). The cause may be minor, but there is a
                                                                !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                                                   You may have
                                                                torsion, or twisting,
                                                                of the testis, especially
   possibility of cancer of the testis, which is easily         if the pain is severe,
   treated if diagnosed early. Painful swelling in the          which can result in
                                                                permanent damage if
   genital area requires immediate medical attention.           not treated promptly.
                                                                A less serious possible
                                                                cause is inflammation
           What is the                Does the problem          of the epididymis
          nature of your                affect one or           (sperm-carrying tube),
START                                                           especially if you also
           symptoms?                    both testes?
                                                                have a fever.

              Pain and
                                              One
              swelling
                                                                       ACTION
              Painless
                                              Both              CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
          enlargement in
           or near testis                                       Internal damage to the
                                                                testes is a possibility.
            Generalized
              painless
             swelling of
            the scrotum                                              Have you had
                                          ACTION                    an injury in the
              None of                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT              genital area
             the above               TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR             within the past
                                     You may have one of               48 hours?
                                     the following disorders
                                     of the scrotum: an
                                     accumulation of fluid,               Injury
                                     a hernia, or varicose
                                     veins. However, the
                                     slight possibility of
                                                                        No injury
                                     cancer of the testis
                                     needs to be ruled out.

                                                                       ACTION
             ACTION
                                                                SEE YOUR DOCTOR
        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                     WITHIN 24 HOURS
        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                          ACTION                You may have an
        You probably have a                                     infection of the testes
        cyst in the epididymis       MAKE AN APPOINTMENT        or epididymides
        (sperm-carrying tube in      TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR         (sperm-carrying tubes).
        the scrotum). However,       if you cannot identify     The cause could be a
        the slight possibility       a possible cause for       viral infection, such as
        of cancer of the testis      your testes or scrotum     mumps, or a sexually
        needs to be ruled out.       problem from this chart.   transmitted disease.
152    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Penis problems
           If you have erectile dysfunction, see p.150
                                                                      Blood in the semen
       Pain or soreness of the penis that is not related to           Blood-streaked semen is
       injury is often due to infection in the urinary tract          usually caused by leakage
                                                                      from small blood vessels in
       or skin of the penis. Inflammation may be caused               the testes or epididymis. A
       by friction during sexual intercourse. You should              single episode is unlikely to
                                                                      be a cause for concern, but,
       consult your doctor if there is any change in the              if it recurs, you should
       appearance of the skin of the penis.                           consult your doctor. It is also
                                                                      important to consult your
                                                                      doctor if you notice a blood-
                                                                      stained discharge that is not
                                                                      related to ejaculation or if you
                  What is the                 When does the           notice blood in your urine.
      START        problem?                    pain occur?

                   Painful or                     Only with
                   sore penis                    an erection
                                                                               ACTION
                   Discharge                     Only when               GO TO ANOTHER CHART
                  from penis                     urinating               Painful urination, p.138

                    Foreskin
                                               At other times
                    problem

                  Change in                                                   How is the
                appearance of                                                   foreskin
                 erect penis                                                   affected?
                    None of
                                                                           After retraction,
                   the above                     ACTION                   cannot be replaced

                                          !   DIAL 911 OR CALL EMS
                                             Inability to replace
                                           a retracted foreskin
                                                                           After childhood,
                                                                           cannot be fully
                                           (paraphimosis) can                 retracted
                                           restrict the blood flow.
                                           • While waiting, place           Balloons when
                                           an ice pack against the            urinating
                                           affected area.
                                                                                None of
                                                                               the above

                   ACTION
                                                 ACTION
              SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                                  ACTION
                                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              WITHIN 24 HOURS
                                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              or go to a clinic for
              sexually transmitted         You may have                  TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR

              diseases. You may            Peyronie’s disease,           An abnormally tight
              have an STD infection        which causes curvature        foreskin may cause
              such as gonorrhea.           of the erect penis.           these problems.
                                                             PENIS PROBLEMS     153

  Has the painful               ACTION                    ACTION
   erection now            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT       CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
     subsided?             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR        You may have an
                           An abnormally tight       obstruction to the flow
                           foreskin may cause        of blood leaving the
      Subsided             this problem.             penis, which causes
                                                     prolonged painful
                                                     erections and can
     Still present                                   damage the penis.

                                ACTION
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
  Has your penis                                          ACTION
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
     become                You may have balan-
                                                     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
    inflamed?              titis, which causes the
                                                     TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                           head of the head of the
                                                     You may have an
       Only tip            penis to become itchy,
                                                     allergic reaction to the
      inflamed             sore and inflamed.
                                                     latex in condoms or to
                                                     a contraceptive cream.
    Whole penis                                      • Keep the skin moist
     inflamed                                        with an emollient cream
                                                     such as petroleum jelly.

       Neither             Do you have any           • Use a mild soap.
                           of the following          • Topical corticosteroid
                            on the skin of           creams may help to
                                                     reduce inflammation.
                             your penis?

      ACTION
                                   Ulcers
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
or go to a clinic for
sexually transmitted            Sore areas                ACTION
diseases. This may be                                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
a chancre caused by                                  TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
syphilis, or it could be          Blisters           or go to a clinic for
cancer of the penis.                                 sexually transmitted
                                 None of             diseases. Any of these
                                the above            skin symptoms may be
                                                     the result of an STD,
                                                     such as genital herpes.
     Have you
 noticed either of
 the following on               ACTION
   your penis?
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
    Flat, painless         or go to a clinic for
         sore              sexually transmitted           ACTION
                           diseases. You may         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
    Small, fleshy          have genital warts.       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      lumps                                          if you cannot identify
                                                     a possible cause for
                                                     your problem from
       Neither
                                                     this chart.
154    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Breast problems
       It is important to familiarize yourself with the
       normal look and feel of your breasts so that you            What is the
                                                                  nature of your
       are able to detect any changes in them (see Breasts:        symptoms?
       self-examination, p.69). Most breast problems are
       not serious, but consult your doctor if you notice any        Small, hard
                                                                   lump in breast
       changes. Minor conditions clearly related to breast-
       feeding usually respond well to simple treatments.        Swollen, hard, and
                                                                  tender breasts

                    Are you                                      Redness of part or
                                            Where is the          all of one breast
      START      breastfeeding
                                             problem?
                    a baby?
                                                                      None of
                                                                     the above
                 Breastfeeding               In the breast

                      Not
                                            On the nipple            ACTION
                 breastfeeding
                                                                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                if you cannot identify
                                            What is the         a possible cause for
                                           nature of your       your breast problem
                   ACTION                                       from this chart.
                                          breast problem?
              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR            Single lump in
              These symptoms may              the breast              How is
              be caused by minor
                                                                    your nipple
              problems that are easily       A nipple has
              treatable or that need                                 affected?
                                             changed in
              no treatment. However,
                                             appearance
              such changes must be                                  Tender only
              investigated promptly                                when feeding
                                           Discharge from
              to rule out the chance
              of breast cancer.              the nipple
                                                                     Tender and
                                             Breasts feel             painful all
                                               tender                  the time

                                             Breasts feel
                   ACTION                  lumpy and hard
              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                               None of
              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                              the above              ACTION
              Discharge from the
              nipple may be caused                              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
              by a local infection or                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
              a hormonal problem.                               if you cannot identify
              However, the possibility                          a possible cause for
              of breast cancer needs                            your breast problem
              to be ruled out.                                  from this chart.
                                                             BREAST PROBLEMS      155

      ACTION                                                ACTION
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                    TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                     Overfull breasts are
if the lump has not                                    common, especially
disappeared within a                                   when you first start
week or if the breast                                  breastfeeding and your
becomes painful or red.                                milk supply has not
The lump may be                  ACTION                yet adjusted to your
caused by a blocked                                    baby’s needs.
milk duct.                 SEE YOUR DOCTOR             • Continue to
                           WITHIN 24 HOURS             breastfeed your baby
                           You may have mastitis       at regular intervals.
                           (a breast infection
                           causing inflammation)
                                                       • Take an analgesic
                                                       such as acetaminophen.
                           or even a breast abscess,
                           particularly if you are     • Place a heating pad
                                                       or covered hot-water
                           also not feeling well.
                                                       bottle on the affected
                           • Continue to               breast(s).
                           breastfeed from both
                                                       CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
      ACTION               of your breasts.
                                                       or breastfeeding
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES                                 adviser if you are
This problem may be a                                  concerned.
result of your baby not
latching on to your
nipple properly.
• Make sure that your
baby takes the nipple
and the surrounding
area into his or her
                             Does either of
mouth properly.              the following
                                                            ACTION
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR             apply?
                                                       MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
or breastfeeding
                                                       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
adviser if you are still      You are due to
having problems when                                   if you are concerned.
                               menstruate              The problem may
you use the correct           within 10 days
feeding technique.                                     simply be the result
                                                       of hormonal changes
                                You might              associated with the
                               be pregnant             menstrual cycle that can
      ACTION                                           lead to premenstrual
                                                       breast tenderness.
TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES            Neither
Your symptoms may
be due to cracked
nipples, usually caused
by your baby not
latching on properly.
•Keep your nipples
dry between feedings                                        ACTION
and use moisturizing
cream.                           ACTION                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR                                    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
or breastfeeding           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT         Breast tenderness is
adviser if the problem     TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR          common during
persists or makes          if you cannot identify      pregnancy. If you are
breastfeeding difficult.   a possible cause for        not sure whether you
                           your breast problem         are pregnant, perform
                           from this chart.            a home pregnancy test.
156   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Menstrual period pain
      Many women experience mild cramping pain in the
                                                                      ACTION
      lower abdomen during menstruation. This pain is
                                                                 MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
      considered normal unless it interferes with everyday       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
      activities; it can usually be relieved by an analgesic.    An increase in
                                                                 menstrual pain is a side
      If you regularly have severe pain or if your periods       effect of some IUDs.
      become unusually painful, consult your doctor to
      rule out the possibility of infection or disorder.
                                                                    Do you have
                                                                   an intrauterine
               Are your                     ACTION                  contraceptive
 START        menstrual                TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES       device (IUD)?
             periods more              Some pain experienced
             painful than              during your menstrual
                                       period is quite normal.            IUD
                usual?
                                       • Take an analgesic
                                       such as ibuprofen.
                No worse               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT              No IUD
               than usual              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                       if pain interferes with
                 Worse                 normal activities.
               than usual                                           Have your
                                                                 menstrual periods
                                                                  become heavier
                                          Have you had              or longer?
                                           any of the
          Have you had an                  following?
           unusual vaginal                                              Heavier
             discharge
                                        Lower abdominal
          between periods?
                                          pain between
                                        menstrual periods               Longer
              No discharge
                                        Lower back pain
                                        between periods                 Neither
                Discharge
                                                Fever
                                                                      ACTION
                                              None of            MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                             the above
                                                                 You may have fibroids
                                                                 (noncancerous tumors
               ACTION                                            in the uterus) or
                                            ACTION               endometriosis. This is
          SEE YOUR DOCTOR                                        a condition in which
          WITHIN 24 HOURS              MAKE AN APPOINTMENT       the tissue that usually
          You could have pelvic        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR        lines the uterus
          inflammatory disease,        if you cannot identify    becomes attached to
          which causes infection       a possible cause for      other organs in the
          in the reproductive          your menstrual pain       abdomen and bleeds
          organs.                      from this chart.          during menstruation.
                                   MENSTRUAL PERIOD PAIN • HEAVY MENSTRUAL PERIODS             157

   Heavy menstrual periods
   If you bleed between periods, see p.158
                                                                         ACTION
   Some women lose more blood than others during
                                                                    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
   their menstrual periods. If normal sanitary protection           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   is not sufficient, if bleeding lasts longer than 5 days,         Some IUDs can cause
                                                                    menstrual periods to be
   or if you notice that you are passing blood clots, the           heavier than normal.
   bleeding is probably excessive. If you are concerned
   about heavy menstrual periods, consult your doctor.

                                                                         ACTION
            Are your                         Do you have
START      menstrual                        an intrauterine         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                                    TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         periods heavier                     contraceptive
                                                                    Heavy, painful periods
         or longer than                      device (IUD)?
                                                                    may be an indication
              usual?                                                that you have fibroids
                                                                    (noncancerous tumors
                                                   IUD
                                                                    in the uterus) or
          About the same                                            endometriosis, which
                                                                    causes the tissue that
                                                 No IUD             usually lines the uterus
               Heavier
                                                                    to become attached to
              or longer                                             other organs in the
                                                                    abdomen and bleed
                                                                    during menstruation.
                                          Have you had a
                                            single heavy
                                          menstrual period
                                           that was later
                                             than usual?                 Are your
             ACTION                                                     menstrual
                                                                       periods more
        MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                        Yes                 painful than
        TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                          usual?
        Some women regularly
        have heavy menstrual
                                                   No                   More painful
        periods, sometimes
        accompanied by pain
        in the lower abdomen.
        However, the loss of                                            The same or
        significant quantities                 ACTION                   less painful
        of iron through heavy
        bleeding could make               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
        you susceptible to iron-          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
        deficiency anemia.                if you are concerned
                                          about the cause of             ACTION
                                          your late period. Late
                                          periods may be heavier    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                          than usual. However, if   TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                          you are sexually active   if you cannot identify
                                          there is a possibility    a possible cause for
                                          that you have had an      your heavy menstrual
                                          early miscarriage.        periods from this chart.
158    FAMILY ILLNESS

       Abnormal vaginal bleeding
       Vaginal bleeding is considered abnormal if it occurs
       outside the normal menstrual cycle, during pregnancy,       !   Bleeding in
                                                                       pregnancy
       or after menopause. Although there is often a simple            If you have any vaginal
       explanation, you should always see your doctor if               bleeding during pregnancy,
                                                                       you should contact your
       you have any abnormal vaginal bleeding. If you                  doctor immediately. If the
       are pregnant and you notice bleeding, you should                bleeding is heavy, dial 911
                                                                       or call EMS. Although some
       consult your doctor immediately.                                causes of bleeding are not
                                                                       serious, it is important to rule
                                                                       out miscarriage or problems
                                                                       such as a low-lying placenta
                                              ACTION                   or partial separation of the
                  Are you
      START      pregnant?               CALL YOUR DOCTOR              placenta from the wall of
                                         IMMEDIATELY                   the uterus.
                                         Bleeding at this stage
               More than 14              of pregnancy could be
                                         due to a problem with
              weeks pregnant
                                         the placenta (see box
                                         above right).
               Less than 14
              weeks pregnant             • Rest in bed until you
                                         receive medical advice.
                                                                            Is the bleeding
                Not pregnant
                                                                                similar to
                                                                                that of a
                                                                            normal period?

                                                                              Like a period
                                              ACTION
               Do you have               CALL YOUR DOCTOR
               unusual pain              IMMEDIATELY                             Different
               in the lower              You may be having a
                  back or                miscarriage or you
                abdomen?                 could have an ectopic
                                         pregnancy.

                  Lower                  • Rest in bed until you
                                         receive medical advice.
                 back pain

              Abdominal pain
                                                                                How long
                                                                               has it been
                  Neither                     ACTION                         since your last
                                         CALL YOUR DOCTOR                       menstrual
                                         IMMEDIATELY                             period?
                                         Bleeding at this stage
                                         of pregnancy could be                   Less than
                                         the first sign of a                     6 months
                                         threatened miscarriage.
                                         • Rest in bed until you                More than
                                         receive medical advice.                6 months
                                                     ABNORMAL VAGINAL BLEEDING              159

  Does either of
  the following
                                ACTION
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                                                          !   Hormonal
                                                              contraceptives
     apply?                TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                 In the first few menstrual
                           if you are concerned.              cycles after starting
   You have only           Irregular periods are              hormonal contraception
                           fairly common in the               or changing to a different
  recently started
                           first year or so of                type of oral contraception,
   having periods          menstruation.                      spotting is fairly common.
                                                              If abnormal bleeding
                                                              persists or develops when
  You are over 40                                             you have had no previous
                                                              problems, you should
                                                              consult your doctor. He or
       Neither                  ACTION                        she may examine you and
                                                              change the dosage or type
                           MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                of hormonal contraceptive.
                           TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                           if you are concerned
     ACTION                or if your pattern does
                           not return to normal
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           within three menstrual
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                           cycles. Having an
if you are concerned.
                           occasional irregular
Your menstrual periods
                           period is unlikely to
may become irregular
                           indicate a serious
as you approach
                           problem if the period                   ACTION
menopause.
                           was normal in all               MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
                           other respects.                 TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                                           You may have a
                                                           cervical abnormality,
    Have you                                               such as cervical
  had sex in the                                           erosion (which causes
  past 3 months?                                           fragile tissue that has a
                           Have you noticed                tendency to bleed to
                           bleeding within                 form on the surface of
       Had sex                                             the cervix), the
                             a few hours                   development of
                            of having sex?                 precancerous cells, or
    Not had sex                                            cancer of the cervix.
                              Bleeding after
                                having sex

     ACTION                      Bleeding
                               unrelated to
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT             having sex
TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
Bleeding after
menopause may be                                                   ACTION
due to a minor problem
affecting the vagina or                                    CALL YOUR DOCTOR NOW
cervix, such as cervical                                   Bleeding, especially if
erosion (in which the           ACTION                     accompanied by pain
cervix becomes covered                                     in the lower abdomen,
with delicate tissue,      MAKE AN APPOINTMENT             may be the first sign of
which has a tendency       TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR              an ectopic pregnancy
to bleed). However, the    if you cannot identify          or of an impending
possibility of cancer      a possible cause for            miscarriage, even if
of the uterus needs        your abnormal bleeding          you were not aware
to be ruled out.           from this chart.                of being pregnant.
160   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Vaginal discharge
          If the discharge contains blood, see p.158
                                                                       ACTION
      A thin, clear or whitish discharge from the vagina
                                                                 CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
      is normal. This discharge will vary in consistency         if you are concerned
      and quantity with the stage of the menstrual cycle,        or if you develop
                                                                 genital irritation. These
      during sexual arousal, and during pregnancy. An            forms of contraception
      abnormal discharge is usually caused by infection          sometimes cause an
                                                                 increase in normal
      and should be investigated by your doctor.                 vaginal secretions.

             What are the                  ACTION
 START     characteristics of        TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
           your discharge?           You may have thrush,           Do any of the
                                     particularly if you also        following
                                     have genital irritation.          apply?
           Thick and white           • If you have had these
                                     symptoms before, try
                                     an over-the-counter           You are taking
               Normal                product recommended         oral contraceptives
           appearance but            by a pharmacist.
          heavier than usual         CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR               You have
                                     if this is the first time          an IUD
                                     you have had these
           Greenish yellow           symptoms.
                                                                        You are
                                                                       pregnant
                None of
               the above                                                None of
                                                                       the above
                                         Do you have
                                         either of the
               ACTION                     following?                   ACTION
         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT                                     MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                   Fever              TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         if you cannot identify                                  if you are concerned or
         a possible cause for                                    if you develop genital
         your discharge from               Lower                 irritation. Increased
         this chart.                   abdominal pain            vaginal secretion is
                                                                 normal in pregnancy.

                                             Neither

              ACTION
                                                                       ACTION
         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
         TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR                ACTION                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
         or go to a clinic that      SEE YOUR DOCTOR             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
         specializes in sexually     WITHIN 24 HOURS             Cervical erosion, which
         transmitted diseases.       You could have pelvic       causes fragile tissue to
         You may have a              inflammatory disease        form on the surface of
         vaginal infection such      (an infection of the        the cervix, may be the
         as bacterial vaginosis.     reproductive organs).       cause of your discharge.
                              VAGINAL DISCHARGE • GENITAL IRRITATION (WOMEN)                161

   Genital irritation (women)
   Itching and/or soreness in the genital area are
                                                                      ACTION
   symptoms of genital irritation, which is often
                                                                MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
   caused by chemicals in toiletries or detergents.             TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
   Avoid these products and the irritation should               You may have a skin
                                                                condition, such as
   clear up. Genital irritation may also be due to              eczema, that affects
   infection, but often there is no obvious cause. If           the genital area.
   the irritation is persistent, consult your doctor.

           Have you                  Have you noticed
START      noticed an                  any change in              Have you been
         unusual vaginal              the appearance                using a new
           discharge?                of the skin in the           toiletry item or
                                       genital area?               new laundry
              Unusual                                               detergent?
             discharge
                                        Skin changes
            No unusual                                                    Yes
             discharge
                                      No skin changes
                                                                          No

             ACTION
        GO TO ANOTHER CHART
        Vaginal discharge
                                      Does either of
        (p.160)                       the following                   ACTION
                                         apply?
                                                                TRY SELF-HELP MEASURES
                                                                You may be sensitive
                                       Your periods             to an ingredient in the
             ACTION                   are irregular or          new product.
        SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                       have stopped             • Discontinue use of
        WITHIN 24 HOURS                                         the new product.
        These symptoms may            You are over 45           • Use only water to
        be due to diabetes.                                     wash your genital area.
                                                                CONSULT YOUR DOCTOR
                                                                if the irritation has not
                                           Neither
                                                                cleared up in 3–4 days.
            Have you
          been urinating
            more than
             usual?                       ACTION                      ACTION
                                    MAKE AN APPOINTMENT         MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
          Urinating more            TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR          TO SEE YOUR DOCTOR
                                    You may have pubic          A change in your
                                    lice or irritation caused   hormone levels due to
                                    by an infection or          menopause may be
            No increase
                                    allergic reaction.          the cause of irritation.
162   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Home medicine chest
      It is a good idea to keep a small supply of instruments and medicines at home
      for everyday aches and pains and first-aid emergencies. Many people now take
      complementary remedies as well as traditional medicines; recommendations for
      both are given here. All supplies should be kept in their original containers with the
      manufacturer’s instructions and stored in a locked cabinet out of children’s reach.

                        CONVENTIONAL MEDICINES

           DIGITAL THERMOMETER
          Use this type of thermometer             PAIN RELIEF FOR ADULTS
           for taking a temperature by            Acetaminophen, aspirin, and
                 mouth or armpit                   ibuprofen give relief from
                                                     pain and inflammation       PAIN RELIEF FOR CHILDREN
                                                                                 Liquid acetaminophen or liquid
                                                                                  ibuprofen provide relief from
                                                                                  pain, fever, and inflammation

            AURAL THERMOMETER
          These are used in the ear and
           are ideal for young children
                                                                                    1% HYDROCORTISONE
                                                                                          CREAM
                                                                                   Use this cream to soothe
                                                   ANTACID MEDICATION               itchy or inflamed skin
                                                 Liquid or tablet antacids can
                 ORAL SYRINGE                    help relieve the symptoms of
             A syringe or dropper is              indigestion and heartburn
           convenient for giving liquid
           medicines to young children
                                                                                          SUNSCREEN
                                                                                    Creams and oils protect
                                                                                     skin from sun damage

                      COLD REMEDIES                       COUGH REMEDIES            ALLERGY MEDICATION
               Decongestants and lozenges can           Use cough mixtures or     Antihistamines help control
                   relieve cold symptoms                lozenges to soothe dry         hay fever, allergic
                                                           or chesty coughs        conjunctivitis, and bites

                               ORAL
                            REHYDRATION
                               DRINK              MOTION SICKNESS PILLS                    LAXATIVE
                          This fruit-flavoured    Taking these pills prior to               Pills help
                            drink prevents         travel can help prevent            relieve constipation
                              dehydration              motion sickness
                                                                             HOME MEDICINE CHEST                 163

                  COMPLEMENTARY REMEDIES

         GARLIC                      ECHINACEA                     CHAMOMILE               LAVENDER OIL
Garlic is a herbal remedy      Use this herb to protect     This homeopathic remedy      This aromatherapy oil
that wards off infection       against infection and to      soothes teething pains      eases headaches and
and maintains a healthy        relieve the symptoms of      and treats stress, nausea,       aids relaxation
  heart and circulation         colds, coughs, and flu            and vomiting

     ALLIUM             ARNICA CREAM             VALERIAN             GRAPHITES              NUX VOMICA
 This is a standard    This homeopathic      This herbal remedy     This homeopathic       This homeopathic
   homeopathic          remedy aids the      aids relaxation and    remedy is used to        remedy treats
  remedy for hay       healing of bruises       induces sleep         relieve eczema        indigestion and
        fever             and sprains                                 and dermatitis        upset stomachs

USING CONVENTIONAL MEDICINES
• Never give your own prescribed                          • Do not stop taking a prescription
  medicines to another person, even                         medicine unless advised to do so
  if you think that his or her                              by your doctor.
  symptoms are similar to yours.                          • Never give a child more than the
• Do not use any medicine that is past                      stated children’s dose of a medicine,
  its sell-by date or that shows signs of                   and do not give a child even a small
  deterioration. Dispose of out-of-date                     amount of a drug that is intended
  medicine by flushing it down the toilet                   only for adults, unless advised to
  or returning it to the pharmacist.                        do so by a doctor.
• Complete the whole course of any                        • Tell your doctor if you have taken
  prescribed medication, even if your                       or are taking any homeopathic or
  symptoms have disappeared.                                herbal remedies.

USING COMPLEMENTARY REMEDIES
• Take homeopathic pilules no less                        • Take herbal remedies for short
  than 30 minutes before or after food,                     periods only, because the effects of
  and avoid drinking coffee and eating                      long-term use are not yet known.
  strongly flavored foods during a                        • Avoid complementary medicines if
  course of medication.                                     you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
• Ensure that only the person taking                      • Some remedies may interact with
  the homeopathic remedy touches it;                        conventional medicines; consult your
  otherwise, it may lose its potency.                       doctor before taking them.
• Keep the remedies away from any                         • If you have any doubts, consult a
  other medications and strong smells.                      homeopath or herbalist for advice.
164   FAMILY ILLNESS

      Caring for a sick person
       When looking after a sick person at home, whether a child or an adult, your
       main concerns will be to ensure that he or she is comfortable and drinking plenty
       of fluids, that you provide the correct medication at the right time, and that any
       new or worsening symptoms are dealt with correctly. A sick child or baby can
       be more demanding, but loving, patient care is one of the best aids to recovery.

      BRINGING DOWN A FEVER

      1 Check
        •
              temperature 2 Relieve fever
          A fever is a body temperature that               • Drink plenty of cool fluids.
          is above 100.4˚F (38˚C). See pp.68
          and 70 for advice on the different
                                                           • Reduce temperature and relieve
                                                               discomfort with an over-the-counter
          ways of measuring a temperature.                     analgesic such as acetaminophen.
        • If you or your child develops a                    • Give babies over 3 months of age
          fever, look at the charts on pp.74                   and children under 12 years liquid
          and 76 to check whether medical                      acetaminophen (not aspirin).
          help is required or whether the
          cause can be treated at home.                      • Cool young children by removing
                                                Remove         most of their clothing, wiping
                    Provide   Wipe skin with    clothing and   them with a washcloth moistened
                    cool      tepid washcloth   bedclothes
                    fluids                                     with tepid water, and fanning them,
       Use fan to                                              but do not let them get too cold.
       keep room                                                   • Children under 5 years old
       cool
                                                                      are susceptible to febrile
                                                                            seizures (p.43) if they
                                                                                 have a high fever
                                                                                   and should
                                                                                    be watched
                                                                                     very closely.

      SOOTHING A SORE THROAT
        • Rest your voice by speaking as little          • Suck throat lozenges containing a
          as possible.                                     local anesthetic (these are suitable
        • Drink  plenty of fluids, especially              only for adults).
          hot or very cold drinks.                       • Gargle warm salt water (half a
        • Eat ice cream and icicles; they help             teaspoon of salt in a glass of water).
          ease a tickly throat.                           • Install a humidifier or place bowls
        • Take analgesics, such as acetaminophen           of water near radiators to keep the
          or ibuprofen, in the correct doses.              air moist.
                                                         CARING FOR A SICK PERSON                165

RELIEVING ITCHINESS
                          Soothe itchy skin
                          by dabbing with
                                              • For itchiness caused by dry skin,
                          calamine lotion       moisturize the skin by applying
                                                emollients, such as aqueous cream
                                                and petroleum jelly, after washing
                                                and bathing.
                                              • To soothe severe itching caused by
                                                chicken pox, apply calamine lotion
                                                to the spots.
                                              • For severe itching, apply topical
                                                corticosteroids sparingly to the area.
                                                Always follow the manufacturer’s
                                                instructions with corticosteroids.

PREVENTING DEHYDRATION
• If you have a fever or are suffering                                         Give fruit-
  from vomiting and diarrhea, drink                                            flavored
  plenty of fluids every 1–2 hours,                                            rehydrating
  such as diluted orange juice, weak                                           fluids to drink
  sweetened tea, or an over-the-counter
  rehydration solution, which contains
  essential minerals and glucose.
• Do  not give milk to adults, children,
  or bottle-fed babies if they are
  suffering from diarrhea or vomiting.
• a breastfed baby is affected,
  If
  continue to breastfeed and offer
  the baby extra fluids.

RELIEVING A BLOCKED NOSE
                                               • Fill a bowl or basin with hot water
                                                 and lean over it with a towel pulled
                                                 over your head. Breathe deeply.
                                               • Alternative methods are to rub a
                                                 vapor ointment on the chest or to
                                                 use decongestant capsules that are
                                                 filled with menthol and other
                                                 strong-smelling oils.

                                              ! Important
                                                • Do not give steam inhalation treatment to
                                                  young children.
                                                • Older children should undergo steam
                                                  inhalation treatment only if supervised.
166   FAMILY ILLNESS

      ADMINISTERING EYE OINTMENT

       To a child                                  To yourself
       • Wash your hands thoroughly                • Wash your hands thoroughly before
         before using the ointment.                  using the ointment.
       • Draw   the child’s lower eyelid away      • Draw your lower eyelid away from
         from the affected eye.                      the affected eye.
       • Squeeze a thin line of ointment           • Squeeze a thin line of ointment
         along the inside of the lower eyelid.       along the inside of the lower eyelid.
       • Ask the child to close the eye briefly.   • Close your eye briefly.
       • Explain to the child that his or her      • You may find that your vision is
         vision may be temporarily blurred.          temporarily blurred.

      ADMINISTERING EYEDROPS

       To a child                                  To yourself
       • Wash your hands thoroughly before         • Wash your hands thoroughly before
         using the drops.                            using the drops.
       • down and lay the child across
         Sit                                       • Tilt your head backward and
         your lap, holding his or her head           draw the lower eyelid away from the
         steady. Ask another person to                         affected eye.
         help you if necessary.                                    • Drop the eyedrops
       • Draw   the lower eyelid away                                 onto the inside
         from the affected eye and                                    of your lower lid,
         drop the eyedrops on to                                      being careful not
         the inside of the lower lid,                                 to touch the eye
         taking care not to touch                                     itself or the skin
         the eye or the skin around                                   around it with
         it with the dropper.                                         the dropper.
       • Ask  the child to try not                                    • Try not to blink
         to blink right away.                                            right away.

      ADMINISTERING NOSEDROPS

       To a child                                  To yourself
       • Lay the child on her back with her        • Lie down on a bed with your head
         head tilted back. If she is a very         tilted backward.
         young child, hold her arms.                         • Drop the nosedrops into
       • Hold her head still and drop the                      the nostril.
         nosedrops into the nostril.                         • Sniff up the drops, so that
       • Encourage her to sniff up                             they do not run out when
         the drops, so that they do                            you sit up.
         not run out when she                                • Lie still for a few minutes
         sits up.                                              to allow the drops to settle.
                                                    CARING FOR A SICK PERSON              167

 ADMINISTERING EARDROPS

  To a child                               To yourself
  • If the drops are being                 • If the drops are being kept in the
    kept in the refrigerator,                refrigerator, allow them to warm
    allow them to warm to                        to room temperature before
    room temperature                                 using them.
    before using them.                                 • Lie down or tilt your
  • Lay  the child on his                                head and squeeze the ear
    side. Hold his                                       drops into the ear canal.
    head firmly as you                                   • Keep your head still
    squeeze the drops                                       for a minute to allow
    into the ear canal.                                     the eardrops to settle.
  • Keep his head still
    for a minute
    to allow the                                             Hold child’s
    eardrops                                                 head still
    to settle.

 GIVING ASTHMA MEDICATION TO CHILDREN

1 Reassure
  • Stay calm and reassure the child
                                          3 Deliver
                                            •
                                                    dose
                                             Sit the child or baby on your lap,
    or baby because he may be                place the mouthpiece in the child’s
    frightened by the mask.                  mouth or the mask over the baby’s
  • An asthma attack can be frightening      face and depress the inhaler.
    not only for the child or baby but     • Hold the spacer in place until the
    also for the adult caregiver.            child or baby has taken five deep
                                                   breaths, which should be
                                                     sufficient to inhale all

2 Prepare spacer                                       of the medicine.

  • Check that the inhaler is
    working by shaking it and
    depressing it once.                                                     Hold mask
                                                                            over baby’s
  • Place the inhaler in the hole                                           face
    at one end of the spacer.
  • Attach  the mask (for a
    baby or young child) or
    mouthpiece (for an older
    child) to the other end
    of the spacer if it is not
    already in place.

                      Depress
                      inhaler                                                  Spacer
168    FAMILY ILLNESS

       GIVING LIQUID MEDICINES TO CHILDREN

      1 Measure dose                             3 Place in mouth
        • Use a syringe or dropper to avoid               • For a child, place the tip of
          spillage and to ensure that you                   the syringe or dropper well
          give the correct dose.                            inside the mouth and angle
        • you are unsure how to use the
          If                                                it toward a cheek.
          syringe or dropper, ask your doctor                         • For a baby,
          or a pharmacist to show you how                               touch his
          to measure and give a dose of                                  lips with the
          medicine to a baby or child.                                    syringe or
        • Always   measure out the dose                                     dropper to
          before you pick up the child                                       encourage
          or baby; otherwise, you may not                                   him to open
          be able to do the job.                                           his mouth.

      2 Reassure child                           4 Deliver dose
        or baby                                    • Slowly press the plunger or squeeze
                                                     the dropper, allowing the child or
        • Hold the child or baby securely on         baby time to swallow. Do not aim
          your lap to give reassurance and           directly down the child or baby’s
          prevent possible struggling.               throat; this could cause choking.
        • Have a drink ready in case the taste     • the child or baby spits out the
                                                     If
          is unpleasant to the child or baby.        medicine, wait until he has calmed
        • If the child or baby is nervous            down and then try again.
          about taking the medicine, explain       • Mix   the medicine with a little jam,
          that the drug will help him feel           if this helps, but do not add it to a
          better and stress that it will all         drink because it may stick to the
          be over very quickly.                      sides of the cup.

       DEALING WITH A PANIC ATTACK

      1 Calm person                              2 Treat
        • Stay calm yourself and
          take the person
                                                   hyperventilation
          to a quiet                               • If the person feels tingling in the
          place.                                     fingers, it may be caused by too
                                                     much carbon dioxide in the blood.
                                                   • Encourage her to breathe more
                                                     slowly and to imitate you.
                                                   • Try holding a paper bag against
                                                     her mouth, so that she rebreathes
                                                     her own expired air, until her
                                                     symptoms stop.
                                                      CARING FOR A SICK PERSON             169

 RELAXATION EXERCISES

1 Get
  •
      ready
   Performing breathing and muscle
                                           3 Relax muscles
                                             • Lie down, put your arms by your
   relaxing exercises can help rid you         side, and let your feet fall open.
   of feelings of anxiety.
                                             • Shut your eyes.
 • Wear comfortable, unrestrictive           • Take one or two slow, deep
   clothing.
                                               breaths. Focus on your breathing.
 • Choose   a warm, quiet room for
                                             • Starting with your feet and
   your relaxation exercises.
                                               working up to your head, tense
 • Prepare a firm yet comfortable              the muscles in each part of your
   surface, such as an exercise mat or         body, hold for a count of three,
   folded blanket, and have some               then release the tension.
   cushions nearby for extra support.
                                               Rest your shoulders      Align your head
                                               on the floor             with your body

2 Start with
  breathing exercises
  • Put one hand on your chest and
    the other on your abdomen.
  • Inhale slowly, hold your breath for
    a moment, then exhale slowly.
  • Try to breathe using your abdomen
    muscles so that the lower hand
    moves more than the upper hand.        4 Finish by resting
  • Once you are breathing from your         • When you have completed the
    abdomen, feel your lower hand              exercises, lie still for a few
    rise and fall with your abdomen.           moments, keeping your eyes shut,
                                               then roll over onto your side.
                                             • Draw  your knees up slightly and
                                               bend your arms to support your
                                               body in a comfortable position.
                                             • After a few minutes, open your
                      Feel the gentle          eyes and get up slowly.
                      movement of
                      your abdomen
                                                      Use your arms
                                                      to support your
                        Sit on a cushion              upper body        Rest on a pillow
                        for comfort                                     for comfort
                                       3
HOUSEHOLD
EMERGENCIES
 Fires, burst water pipes, sink blockage, and roof leakage are just a few
   of the many household incidents that can occur in any home at any
     time. By knowing how to cope with a wide range of household
problems, and having the right equipment for the job, you can minimize
    any damage to your home and danger to your family. Follow the
instructions to fix simple problems yourself by performing tasks such as
 releasing air from a radiator or replacing a pane of glass. For jobs that
 are less straightforward, learn how to create a temporary solution until
     you can arrange for a professional to make a permanent repair.

                         Home safety ................172       Air-conditioning
                         Yard safety...................178     problems......................194
                         Fires in the home ........180         Electrical problems......196
                         Gas leaks ......................184   Structural problems ....200
                          Plumbing                             Insects and pests .........208
                           problems...................186      Furniture and
                            Central-heating                    furnishings...................210
                             problems ................192      Home security .............212
172    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       Home safety
       Your home should be a place of safety and security, yet every year household
       accidents cause countless serious injuries and many deaths. By being aware of the
       potential dangers and taking action to make your home as safe as possible, you
       can do a great deal to reduce the risk of accident. The following room-by-room
       guide highlights potential trouble spots and provides practical advice on sensible
       safety precautions. Most household accidents derive from carelessness, so work
       cautiously and wear safety equipment when undertaking do-it-yourself projects.

       MAKING YOUR HOME SAFE
                                                                     ESSENTIALS
      1 Be
        •
           prepared
          Assemble a basic emergency repair
                                                   EMERGENCY REPAIR EQUIPMENT
          kit (see box, right) and keep it in      • First-aid kit            • Candles and
                                                       (p.60)                   matches
          an accessible place.                     •   Flashlight and spare   • Plugs and fuses
        • Make    sure that all family members         batteries                (p.197)
          know where the equipment is kept.        •   Lightbulbs             • Screwdriver
        • Check that the adults know where
          to find and how to operate the
          main controls for gas (by the gas
          meter), electricity (by the fusebox),
          and water (often located under
                                                  3 Work safely
                                                   • If you are doing emergency
          the kitchen sink).                         repairs, take all necessary safety
        • Draw up a family evacuation plan           precautions, especially if the work
          (p.173) and practice it regularly.         involves electricity.
        • Near the telephone, keep a list of       • Wear safety equipment: goggles
          phone numbers of an emergency              to protect eyes from flying debris;
          plumber and electrician, your              dust mask to prevent dust from
          family doctor, and 24-hour                 entering the lungs; and ear plugs
          helplines for reporting gas and                         to protect ears
          water leaks.                                              from the noise
                                                                     of power tools.

      2 Prepare
        •
                for fire
           Install smoke and carbon monoxide
                                                                              Wear goggles and
                                                                              a mask to protect
           alarms or detectors (p.173).                                       against dust

         • Keep a fire blanket and a dry
           powder fire extinguisher that
           weighs at least 2 lb (1 kg) near the                                      Hold tools
           stove in the kitchen. Have the                                            firmly for
           extinguisher serviced regularly.                                          maximum
                                                                                     control
         • Buy a metal fire ladder to use
           when escaping.
                                                                        HOME SAFETY            173

 MAKING A FAMILY EVACUATION PLAN

1 Plan escape routes 3 Practice your plan
  •                    •
    Decide on the best route for escape       Walk through the escape routes
    – this should be the usual way in         with family members so that
    and out of your home.                     everyone knows what to do.
  • Plan an alternative route to use if     • Practice these escape routes on
    the normal way is blocked.                a regular basis, especially after
  • If doors or windows need to be            making changes in your home.
    unlocked to escape, make sure that      • Wear  blindfolds during one
    everyone knows where to find the          practice, to simulate dark and
    appropriate keys. Ensure that the         smoky conditions, but be careful
    doors and windows open easily.            with young children and the elderly.

2 Plan meeting point ! Important
  • Decide on a safe assembly point         • Keep all escape routes free of furniture
    outside the home where everyone           and clutter.
    can meet following an evacuation.
                                            • If you have overnight guests, tell them about
  • Make sure that the whole family is        your evacuation plan so that they will know
    aware of how to escape and where          what to do in the event of a fire.
    to meet after evacuation.

INSTALLING SMOKE ALARMS

1 Choose
  •
         alarms
    Buy battery-operated or electrical
                                          3 Test
                                            •
                                                 regularly
                                              Check once a month by pressing
    smoke alarms and take care to             the test button. Change the battery
    choose a reliable brand.                  in each alarm every 6 months.
  • For added safety, choose linked         • Vacuum the inside of each
    alarms, which set each other off          regularly to keep the sensor
    when smoke is detected.                   chamber free of dust.

2 Install                                   I N S TA L L I N G C A R B O N
                                            MONOXIDE ALARMS
  • Attach alarms securely to the
    ceiling at least 12 in (30 cm) away
    from any wall or light fixture.         • Install one or two carbon monoxide alarms
                                              near sleeping areas and in any room with a
  • If your home is on one level, put a       boiler or a gas fire; these alarms emit a loud
    smoke alarm in the hall; if it has
                                              noise when they detect the gas.
    more than one story, install one
    at the bottom of the stairs and         • Place carbon monoxide detectors next to
    another on each landing.                  boilers and gas fires; these detectors
                                              change color if carbon monoxide is present.
174   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      MAKING YOUR KITCHEN SAFE
                Turn pan handles                                                   Store knives
                away from the              Keep appliances near the                safely in a
                front of the stove         wall and unplugged when                 knife block
                                           not in use

                    Use the back burners          Keep a fire blanket and fire     Wipe up spilled
                    of the stove in               extinguisher in the kitchen      liquids immediately
                    preference to the             and make sure that you           and make sure that
                    front ones                    know how to use them             floors are dry before
                                                                                   walking on them

       • If you have a water heater in the                 • Store matches, sharp items, and
         kitchen, make sure that the flue is                 household chemicals well out of
         kept clear. If you use gas, install a               the reach of children.
         carbon monoxide alarm in the
                                                           • Try to keep young children out of
         kitchen, as close to the water heater               the kitchen when you are cooking.
         as possible (p.173).
                                                           • Turn pan handles toward the wall
       • Unplug or switch off electrical                     so that children cannot grab them
         appliances at the wall when they                    or accidentally knock them.
         are not being used. Kettles, electric
         knives, and blenders are particularly             • Install guard rails around the stove
         hazardous.                                          to keep children away.
       • Use  a ladder to reach high shelves               • Warn children that stovetops –
         instead of standing on a stool, which               especially electric burners, which
         could tip over.                                     may show no signs of being hot –
                                                             can burn even when the power is off.
       • Never   leave a skillet or deep fryer
         unattended on the stove (p.183).                  • Store sharp knives well out of the
                                                             reach of children, ideally in a
       • Ensure that work surfaces and sinks                 wooden knife block.
         are well lit so you can work safely.
       • If you have young children, install               • Always switch off the electric iron
         simple security latches on cabinets                 and move it out the reach of
         and drawers that contain hazardous                  children when it is unattended.
         liquids or objects.                               • Wipe   up spills as soon as possible.
                                                                                 HOME SAFETY            175

MAKING YOUR LIVING ROOM SAFE
                                       Keep fire guards
                Do not overload        around the fire
                electrical outlets     at all times

                                                                               Secure bookcases
             Do not let electric                            Put nonslip mats   and other heavy
             wires trail across the                         under rugs to      furniture to the walls
             floor or under the       Put children’s toys   prevent slipping   to prevent them
             carpet                   away after use                           from falling over

• Avoid running electric wires across              • Secure carpets and rugs firmly so
  the floor: these could be tripped on.              that people cannot trip on them.
• Never  run wires under a carpet                    If you have polished wooden floors,
  where people walk; with wear, the                  place nonslip mats underneath rugs
  carpet may expose bare wires.                      so that they do not move.
• Check all electrical wiring regularly:           • Always check an open fire before
  frayed insulation can cause fires.                 going to bed at night and make
                                                     sure that a fire guard is in place.
• Don’t overload electric sockets
  with multi-point adaptors. Use an                • Install a carbon monoxide detector
  extension cable with four or six                   beside a gas fire (p.173).
  socket outlets instead.                          • Unplug or switch off electric fires and
• If you have an open fire, make sure                televisions at the wall socket at night.
  that you use a fire guard, especially            • Empty   all ashtrays and dispose of
  when children are present.                         their contents safely at night.

MAKING YOUR HALL AND STAIRS SAFE
• Ensure that halls and stairways are              • Mats and rugs on parquet or
  well lit – especially if children or               polished wood flooring can be
  elderly people are likely to use them.             dangerous. Place nonslip mats
• Leave a nightlight on at night.                    underneath them to prevent them
                                                     from sliding.
• If you have young children,
  install safety gates at the stairway             • Install extra grab rails on the stairs
  entrances, and keep them closed.                   to assist elderly people.
• Check for worn areas of carpet,                  • Keep the areas at the top and bottom
  which could cause trips or falls.                  of the stairs clear at all times.
176   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      MAKING YOUR BATHROOM SAFE
                     Always test the water                                    Install electrical
                     temperature before                                       outlets in the
                     getting into a shower                                    bathroom for
                                                                              electric razors only

           Install a firm grab
           rail over the bathtub
                                                                          Control wall-mounted
                                                                          bathroom lighting by
                                                                          pull-cord switches

                                                                          Use non-slip mats
                                                                          in the shower
                                                                          and bathtub

       • Secure a grab rail on the wall above      • Never touch an electrical item with
         the bathtub to provide extra support        wet hands.
         – especially for elderly people.
                                                   • Make   sure that bathroom lights and
       • Run the cold water first when               wall-mounted heaters are controlled
         preparing a bath for young children.        by pull-cord switches or switches
       • Never leave young children on their         outside the room.
         own in a bath.                            • Check gas water heaters regularly
       • Make   sure that shower units are           to ensure that flues remain clear.
         fitted with efficient thermostatic          Install a carbon monoxide detector
         controls, so that there is no risk of       or alarm (p.173).
         anyone being scalded.                     • Never mix two types of household
       • Store medicines in a locked cabinet         chemicals, such as bleach and
         out of the reach of children.               bathroom cleaner. The combination
                                                     can produce poisonous fumes.
       • Never  use an electrical appliance,
         such as a hairdryer or radio, in          • Keep all such chemicals out of the
         a bathroom.                                 reach of children.

      MAKING YOUR BEDROOM SAFE
       • Service electric blankets regularly       • Never drape a cloth over a bedside
         and check their wiring for wear             light to reduce glare. The heat from
         and deterioration.                          the bulb could cause a fire.
       • Never leave electric blankets on          • Keep bedroom floors clear of clutter,
         overnight unless the instructions           especially if elderly people or young
         make it clear that it is safe to do so.     children may get up to use the
         They may overheat and catch fire.           bathroom at night.
       • Keep  a flashlight and your cellular      • If bedroom windows have locks, keep
         phone (if you have one) by the bed          the keys nearby – you may need to
         at night, for use in an emergency.          use windows as emergency exits. If
       • Never smoke in bed. You could fall          possible, leave bedroom windows
         asleep with a lit cigarette.                unlocked at night.
                                                                              HOME SAFETY          177

MAKING YOUR CHILD’S BEDROOM SAFE
• Never use pillows or comforters in                • When a young child moves out of
  cribs for babies under 1 year old.                  a crib, secure guard rails to the bed
• Do not allow very young children to                 so that she cannot fall out.
  sleep on the upper level of a bunk                • Make sure that there are no lamps
  bed; they may fall out.                             within reach of a child’s crib or bed.
• Make sure that there is no gap                      Lightbulbs get hot, and pulling
  between the mattress and bed rail                   on the wire could be dangerous.
  through which a child could slip.                 • Install plastic covers over electrical
                                                      outlets that are not in use.
                                                    • Use plug-in nightlights so that
                                                      children can find their way if they
                                                      need to get up in the night.
                                                    • Install removable window guards
                                                      that allow windows to normally
                                                        open only slightly for ventilation,
                                                            but fully during an emergency.

                                                                                Put nonslip
                                                                                mats under
                                                                                rugs

                            Avoid feather pillows                          Keep bedroom
                            and comforters as                              floors clear of
                            they can provoke                               clutter
                            allergies

MAKING YOUR ATTIC SAFE
• Never use freestanding stepladders                • Protect ceilings underneath by
  to ascend into the attic space: they                distributing the weight of stored
  tend to be unstable and are likely to               items. Put heavier boxes at the sides.
  tip over. Instead, install an attic
  ladder with a hand rail.
• Install a light in the attic, preferably
  controlled from the landing below.
  Choose a lightswitch that indicates
  whether the attic light is on or off.
• Line the attic floor with floorboards,
  or attach veneered chipboard to the
  rafters, so that you can store items
  and move around safely.
• Before  storing heavy items, have a
  carpenter check that the rafters are
  strong enough to support the
                                                     Use a pulldown          Store heavier items
  extra weight.                                      ladder for safety       around the edges
                                                                             of the attic floor
178   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      Yard safety
      Yards and outside buildings present many hazards, so safety is an essential part
      of yard maintenance. Check that garden yard boundaries are secure, especially
      if children or animals are likely to be outside; that paths and patios are free of
      debris; and that toolsheds and equipment are securely locked. Gardening itself
      can be a dangerous pastime, so make sure that you also take the necessary
      precautions when working with tools and machinery.

      PREVENTING ACCIDENTS IN THE YARD
       • Remove or fence off any poisonous          • Don’t risk injuring your back by
         plants or trees in your yard.                lifting a heavy load on your own –
       • Keep   children and animals away             ask someone to help you.
         from any area that has been sprayed        • Never run a powerline along a fence
         with weedkiller.                             or bury it underground when
       • Cover   outside drains with metal            running electricity to a shed or
         grills so that children’s feet will not      workshop. Use special shielded cable
         get caught inside them. Grills will          underground, or run cable overhead,
         also help prevent garbage from               supported by a special wire. When
         blocking drains.                             in doubt, consult an electrician.
       • Fence off ponds, swimming pools,           • For outside lighting and water-
         and any other water features in the          feature pumps, use a 12-volt system
         yard if the space is used by children.       with a transformer and house it in a
                                                      dry shed or other outdoor building.
       • Do not attempt to use a wheel-
         barrow to move heavy equipment;            • When you are operating electrical
         it will be very unstable. It is much         power tools, such as lawnmowers
         safer to use a cart instead.                 or hedge clippers, always secure a
                                                      circuit breaker between the piece
                                                      of equipment and the power source.
                                                      Make sure that you wear the

      ! Water danger
        • Young children can drown in as little
                                                      appropriate safety gear, such as
                                                      safety goggles, protective gloves
                                                      and if necessary ear protectors.
          as a few inches of water. Even a
          bucket of water poses a danger.
        • If you have a pond, take the precaution
          of stretching strong plastic netting
          over the pond and securing it firmly
                                                    Wear safety
          with wooden pegs.                         goggles to
        • For complete peace of mind, consider      protect eyes
          filling in a pond and choosing a
          safer water feature, such as a            Wear ear protectors
          small fountain.                           if tools are noisy

        • Make sure that any water barrels          Choose protective
          have secure lids.                         gloves for yard
                                                    work
                                                                                 YARD SAFETY               179

MAKING PATHS AND PATIOS SAFE
• Uneven or broken pavement can              • During the winter, watch for a build-
  cause people to trip and fall. Mend          up of algae slime, which can make
  or replace cracked pave-                                        surfaces extremely
  ment as soon as possible.                                       slippery. Clean
• steps are dangerous.
  Icy                                                             algae-coated
  Lay self-adhesive strips                                        walkways with a
  of abrasive material on                                         stiff brush and
  step treads.                                                    soapy water,
                                                                  or use a high-
• Alternatively, coat the                                         pressure washer.
  treads with a mix of
  sharp sand and exterior-                                      • Prevent algae
  grade PVA adhesive.                                             from building up
                                                                  again by treating
      Use a wire brush to                                         the surface with
      remove slippery algae                                       a herbicide.

SECURING BOUNDARIES
• Make sure that boundary gates are          • If you have dogs or young children
  kept locked and that bolts are well          who use the yard, block off any gaps
  out of the reach of young children.          in hedges or fences through which
• If a gate leads onto a road, secure a        they could escape.
  latch that a young child cannot            • Remember     that as dogs and children
  operate. Alternatively, fit a small bolt     get bigger, fences may need to be
  out of sight on the outside of the gate.     raised or strengthened.

MAKING GARAGES AND SHEDS SAFE
• Always keep garages, workshops,            • Never install fluorescent lighting
  and sheds securely locked.                   near moving machinery, because it
• Store  hoes, rakes, shovels, electrical      produces a faint strobe effect that
  equipment, and sharp tools, such as          can confuse the senses, making the
  saws and knives, well out of the             use of such machinery dangerous.
  reach of children.
• Label  all dangerous materials and                        DO’S AND DON’TS
  ensure that container lids or caps
                                               DO                            DON’T
  are firmly closed.
                                               • Use a garage ramp           • Run a car engine in
• Store garden chemicals, such as                  when you are working          an enclosed space.
  pesticides and fungicides, out of                beneath a car.            • Leave a hot tool on a
  the reach of children. Never pour            •   Wear a dust mask              work bench to cool
                                                   and goggles to                down. Hang it up
  expired chemicals down sinks                     protect yourself from         somewhere out of
  or drains; dispose of them safely.               dust when sanding.            reach until it is cool.

• Keep chemicals in their original             •   Store garden chemicals    •   Leave unattended
                                                   and tools safely out of       power tools plugged
  containers. Never store them in                  the reach of children.        in or switched on.
  other bottles.
180   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      Fires in the home
      Statistics show that once fire takes hold, you have less than 3 minutes to escape
      the flames and toxic smoke, and get to safety. With such a limited period of
      time, it is vital to have organized safe escape routes from your home and to have
      regular fire drills with the whole family. Install fire ladders to give you a better
      chance of escaping from upper floors. If a fire is small, try to put it out yourself
      using water, a fire extinguisher, or a fire blanket. However, if the flames are still
      burning after 30 seconds, you should leave the building immediately. To give
      yourself advance warning of a fire, install smoke alarms on every floor of the
      house and make sure that they are tested regularly.

                                   ACTION PLAN

             Are you in the                                         Do you have a
  START      same room as                                           fire blanket or
                the fire?                                            extinguisher
                                                                    that you know
                                                                     how to use?
                   Yes

                                           Is the fire                    Yes
                   No
                                             small?
                                                                          No
                                                Yes

                                                 No                   Have you
                                                                     managed to
                                                                       put out
                                                                    the fire within
                                                                     30 seconds?

            Can you safely                                                Yes
            enter the room
               to assess
                                             ACTION                       No
               the fire?
                                        EVACUATE BUILDING
                                        AND DIAL 911 OR CALL
                   Yes                  THE FIRE DEPT                  ACTION
                                        (see Escaping from a
                                        domestic fire, p.181).     OPEN WINDOWS AND
                                                                   DOORS TO CLEAR
                   No                                              REMAINING SMOKE.
                                                                                FIRES IN THE HOME                181

  ESCAPING FROM A HOUSE FIRE

1 Alert the family
    • A smoke alarm may warn you of
                                                         DO
                                                                     DO’S AND DON’TS

                                                                                     DON’T
       smoke or fire, or you may see a                   •   Feel doors and door     • Use elevators.
       fire start. Check that everyone in
                                                             handles with the back
                                                             of your hand before
                                                                                     • Jump from upstairs
                                                                                         windows unless forced
       the home is aware of the fire and                     opening them.               or told (by the fire
       is leaving quickly.                               •   Close doors and             department) to do so.

                      • Follow the escape
                                                             windows behind you.     •   Underestimate the
                        route chosen in                  •   Keep keys by all            speed at which a fire
                                                             locked windows.             can spread.
                        your evacuation
                        plan (p.173).

                          Close doors
                          behind you
                                                      2 Evacuate building
                                                        • If possible, close internal doors
                                                          and windows as you go, to confine
                                                          the spread of smoke and fire.
                                                        • Do not open a door without first
                                                          touching the door or its knob with
                                                          the back of your hand to see if it is
                                                          hot. Heat indicates fire within that
                                                          room, so choose another route.
                                          Guide
                                          children
                                                        • If there is thick smoke, place a
                                          to safety       handkerchief over your mouth and
                                                          nose, and crawl as low as possible.
                                                        • fire or smoke blocks your escape
                                                          If

! Ifupstairs
      you are trapped
                                                          route, find another way out.
                                                        • Once you are out of the building,
                                                          meet at your agreed assembly point
    • Move into a room where rescuers will                and check that no one is missing.
      be able to see you.
    • Close the door and wedge a blanket
      at its base to prevent smoke from
      entering.
                                                      3 Dial 911 or call the
    • Open a window and shout for help.                  fire department
    • Use a fire ladder (see box below).                 • Tell the dispatcher your address, if
                                                             anyone is still inside the building,
                                                             and if anyone is injured.

!
USING FIRE LADDERS

• Following the instructions, extend and attach
the ladder to the building’s facade. If possible,
                                                      • Help the elderly and children get onto the
                                                        ladder and climb down safely. Reassure them
attach the ladder so that it does not pass over         and tell them not to look down.
lower windows; otherwise, there is a risk that        • Use the children’s harness that accompanies
you might climb down into flames.                       the fire ladder for a baby or young child.
182    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       TACKLING A FIRE

      1 Sound the alarm                            USING FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
                                                   AND BLANKETS
        • Do not attempt to put out a fire
          yourself unless the fire is small,       • Point the nozzle of a dry chemical fire
          you discover it early, and you have        extinguisher at the base of the flames and
          a fire extinguisher or fire blanket.       sweep it from side to side. OR
        • If you have doubts, dial 911 and,        • Take the fire blanket out of its container and
          if necessary, evacuate.                    give it a shake to open it up.
                                                   • Hold the blanket up so that it shields
      2 Protect yourself                             your hands from
                                                     the fire.
        • Make sure that you can retreat           • Drop the blanket
          quickly and safely from the area if        onto the flames
          the fire gets out of control.              and leave it
        • If the fire is still burning after 30      there until the
          seconds, evacuate the house at             fire is out.
          once and dial 911.

       PUTTING OUT CLOTHES ON FIRE

      1 Prevent flames                            2 Smother flames
        from rising                                • Wrap yourself or the victim in a
                                                     thick wool or cotton blanket, rug,
        • If someone else’s clothes are on           or coat to smother the flames.
          fire, force the person to the ground       Do not use materials that contain
          so that the flames do not rise up          synthetic fibers to tackle the fire.
          and burn his face and air passage.
                                                   • Roll yourself or the victim around
        • If your own clothes are on fire,                   on the ground until you are
          lie down immediately to                                 sure that the flames
          prevent the flames from                                   are extinguished.
          rising up and burning your
          face and air passage. If you                                       Roll the victim on
          try to run for help, the                                           the ground to ensure
          movement will simply                                               the flames are out
          fan the flames.

              Use a thick woolen
              rug or blanket to
              smother the flames
                                                             FIRES IN THE HOME       183

 PUTTING OUT AN ELECTRICAL FIRE

1 Switch
  •
         off power
   Unplug the burning appliance or, if
                                          2 Smother
                                                •
                                                    flames
                                                       Drape a fire blanket over
   you cannot safely reach the wall                    the appliance to stifle the
   socket, turn the power                              fire, or douse the flames
   off at the fusebox.                                  with a dry chemical fire
  • a computer monitor
   If                                                      extinguisher (see
   or television is on                                        box opposite).
   fire, the screen could
   explode: protect yourself
   by approaching it from
                                                                Place the fire
   the back or the side.                                        blanket over the
                                                                burning monitor
                                                                from behind

 DEALING WITH A CHIMNEY FIRE

1 Evacuate
  • Many chimney fires are explosive;
                                          2 Summon
                                            •
                                                   help
                                             Dial 911 or call the fire
    bricks become projectiles that           department immediately.
    move like cannonballs.                 • Ensure that the chimney is checked
  • Do  not try to extinguish the fire.      and cleared by a chimneysweep
    Evacuate the house immediately.          before you light another fire in
                                             the grate.

 PUTTING OUT A SKILLET FIRE

1 Approach
  •
           fire
    Turn off the heat supply.
                                          2 Smother
                                            •
                                                    flames
                                             Cover the flames with a fire blanket
  • Do not attempt to move the pan:          (see box opposite). If you do not
    the flames may blow                                   have a fire blanket,
    toward you.                                           use a towel or
                                                          dishcloth that has
  • Do not put water                                      been wrung out
    on a fire that is in
                                                          in water.
    a skillet or deep
    fryer: the water
    will disperse the
    burning fat and
    spread the fire.                                            Protect your hands
                                                                as you approach a
                                                                burning skillet
184   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      Gas leaks
      Natural gas is not poisonous but when combined with air, it becomes highly
      explosive and can destroy a home. Do not attempt to do gas repairs yourself.
      This is one of the few areas of domestic maintenance in which any kind of
      repair or remedial work must be performed by a professional. Because natural
      gas has no smell, an artificial odor (methyl mercaptan) is added to both gas
      lines and tanks so that leaks can be detected quickly. If you smell escaping
      gas, you should take immediate action.

                                  ACTION PLAN

             Can you smell               ACTION                   ACTION
  START       gas inside or         CALL GAS COMPANY          WHEN THE ROOM IS
               outside the          IMMEDIATELY.              WELL VENTILATED AND
                 home?                                        YOU CAN NO LONGER
                                                              SMELL GAS, RELIGHT
                                                              THE PILOT LIGHT.
                Outside
                                          Are any
                                         electrical
                 Inside                 appliances
                                         or lights
                                        turned on?

                                             Yes                 Has a stove,
               ACTION
                                                                boiler, or pilot
           LEAVE THEM ON, WITH                                 light gone out?
           THE EXCEPTION OF AN
                                             No
           ELECTRIC FIRE, WHICH
           SHOULD BE TURNED
                                                                     Yes
           OFF. EXTINGUISH
           ANY FLAMES AND                ACTION
           VENTILATE THE ROOM.
                                     DO NOT TURN ON                   No
                                     ANY APPLIANCES OR
                                     LIGHTS. EXTINGUISH
                                     ANY FLAMES.
               Has a gas
             stove burner
             been left on?               ACTION
                                    TURN THE BURNER OFF           ACTION
                   Yes              AND OPEN WINDOWS
                                    TO VENTILATE ROOM.        TURN THE GAS OFF AT
                                                              THE MAIN AND CALL
                   No                                         YOUR GAS COMPANY
                                                              IMMEDIATELY.
                                                                                      GAS LEAKS             185

IF YOU SUSPECT A GAS LEAK
                                                             DO’S AND DON’TS
1 Avoid danger                                  DO                            DON’T
  of explosion                                  • Extinguish any flames       • Turn on any lights or
                                                    and cigarettes.               electrical appliances.
 • As soon as you smell gas, or if
   you suspect that a gas appliance             •   Ventilate the room.       • Use your home or
   is leaking but you cannot smell              •   Check gas appliances          cellular telephone
                                                    and pilot lights.             until you are outside.
   anything, immediately extinguish                                           •
   any flames, such as cigarettes
                                                •   Turn off the gas supply       Forget to relight pilot
                                                    at the main or on the         lights once the leak
   or candles.                                      gas cylinder.                 has been fixed.

 • Switch off any electric fires.
 • Do not touch any other electrical
   appliances, including light
   switches. Operating anything
   electrical could create a spark that
                                               3 Check
                                                 •
                                                       for leak
                                                  Check all gas appliances and turn
   could ignite a concentration of gas.           off the gas supply at the main
                                                  (next to the meter) or on the gas
                                                  cylinder for bottled gas.

2 Ventilate room                                • Send  family members outside until
                                                  the smell of gas has disappeared.
 • If you find a gas jet left on, turn
   it off immediately. Open windows
   and any external doors.
                                               4 Summon help
                                                • If you cannot identify the source
                                                  of the leak, or can identify it but
                                                  realize you should not attempt to
                                                  fix it, evacuate the home.
                                                • Call your regional gas supplier’s
                                                  emergency number from outside
                                                  your house.
                                                • Keep   the family out of the home
                                                  until the gas company advises you
                                                  that the danger has passed.
                                                • Warn neighbors that you have
                                                  detected a gas leak.
                                                • Once repairs are complete, do not
                                                  forget to relight all the pilot lights
                                                  in the house.

!Carbon monoxide alert
 • Carbon monoxide detectors either set off     • When the siren sounds or the detector
   alarms or they change color when they            changes color, ventilate the room by opening
   sense the presence of the gas in the air.        external doors and windows.
   These detectors should be installed near     • Switch off the leaking appliance (or turn off
   boilers or other appliances using gas,           the gas at the main if you are unsure of the
   such as gas stoves.                              source). Call a professional to repair it.
186   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      Plumbing problems
      Water in the wrong places can cause considerable damage, but the ability to
      make emergency repairs can prevent a minor problem from becoming a disaster.
      In a plumbing crisis, knowing the basics, such as where to find your main
      shutoff valve and how to drain the system, can make the difference.

                                    ACTION PLAN

                Is water             Is water coming              ACTION
  START      leaking from              from the attic         GO UPSTAIRS AND
              the ceiling?                or roof?            CHECK THAT ALL THE
                                                              UPSTAIRS FAUCETS ARE
                                                              TURNED OFF
                    Yes                       Yes

                    No                        No
                                                                Do you have
                                                                access to the
                                                                floor above?
            Is water leaking
             from a kitchen               ACTION
               appliance?                                             Yes
                                     GO UP TO THE ATTIC
                                     AND CHECK FOR A
                    Yes              BURST PIPE OR                    No
                                     DAMAGE TO A WATER
                                     TANK. REPAIR IF
                    No               NECESSARY (see Burst
                                     pipe, p.188, or Fixing
                                     a leaking water tank,        ACTION
                                     p.187). CHECK THE
                ACTION                                        CALL THE BUILDING
                                     ROOF AND REPAIR
                                                              SUPERINTENDENT
           IF A DISHWASHER OR        LEAK (see Leaking
                                                              OR CONTACT YOUR
           WASHING MACHINE IS        roof, p.206)
                                                              LOCAL WATER
           LEAKING, CHECK                                     DEPARTMENT
           DOOR SEALS, SUPPLY
           AND DRAIN PIPES

                                        Is a radiator
                                                                  ACTION
                ACTION                     or pipe
                                          leaking?            IF YOU ARE STILL NOT
           IF THE RADIATOR IS                                 SURE OF THE CAUSE OF
           LEAKING, REPAIR IT                                 THE LEAK, TURN OFF
           (see Radiator leaking,             Yes             THE WATER AT THE
           p.193). IF A PIPE HAS                              MAIN SHUTOFF VALVE,
           BURST, REPAIR IT (see                              DRAIN THE TANK, AND
           Burst pipe, p.188)                 No              CALL A PLUMBER
                                                                                 PLUMBING PROBLEMS               187

  LEAKING CEILING

1 Turn off water main
                                                                          ESSENTIALS

                                                            PLUMBING TOOL KIT
     • Go to the main shutoff valve and                     • Pipe repair tape      • Vise grips
       turn off the water.
                                                            • Pipe-thread seal      • Closet auger
                                                              tape                  • Bolts with rubber
                                                            • Pipe wrench              and metal washers

2 Drain system                                              • Sink plunger          • Epoxy resin sealant
     • Turn off the boiler to keep the
       pipes from overheating.
     • Run the faucets upstairs and flush
       toilets fed by the water tank to                4 Find source of leak
       reduce the water level in the tank.                  • If the water is coming through the
                                                             ceiling, check the room or the
                                                             apartment above.
3 Relieve
  •
          pressure
       Use a bucket to catch water
                                                            • the water is coming from the
                                                             If
                                                             attic area, check for a burst pipe
                                                             or damage to the water tank and
       leaking from the ceiling.
                                                             fix any leak (p.188 and below).
     • If there is a hairline crack, enlarge                 If the pipes and tank are sound,
       it with a screwdriver to increase                     look for holes in the roof itself
       the flow and reduce the weight                        and repair if necessary (p.206).
       of water on
       the ceiling.
     • the ceiling is
       If
       bulging, put
       more buckets
                                                        ! Dangers  of water
                                                          and electricity
       in place, then
       punch a hole.                                        • If water is dripping from a light fixture or
                                                              onto an electrical appliance, do not touch
                                                              the switch, the light fixture, or the appliance.
     Enlarge the crack in                                     Turn off the power at the circuit breaker or
     the ceiling with a                                       fuse box and call an electrician immediately.
     screwdriver

F I X I N G A L E A K I N G C O L D WAT E R TA N K
Some homes have a tank with           open the drain valve of the
a pump for constant house             cold water tank.                                         Put rubber and
                                                                                               metal washers
pressure. Others may have a
                                    • Flush toilets, then open all                             on both sides
repairable reservoir in the attic     cold water faucets.                                      of the hole
or basement.
                                    • Plug a small hole by drilling
• Shut the main valve. Arrange        and inserting a bolt with                                Insert a bolt
  for disposal of cold water.         rubber stops on either side.                             into the hole
• Close the hot water valve at        For corner hole, wipe dry;
  the hot water tank. Then            use an epoxy resin sealant.
188     HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

        BURST PIPE

      1 Locate frozen pipe 3 Shut off water
        •   Water expands as it freezes, which
            can cause old pipes to split open
                                                               supply
            or a compression joint (where two                  • If a compression joint is destroyed,
            lengths of copper piping are                        it will need to be replaced.
            joined) to push apart.                             • the joint is damaged, shut off the
                                                                If
          • you have copper pipes, check
            If                                                  water supply to the pipe by closing
            the compression joints to see if                    the gate valve. If the pipe does not
            any have been pushed apart.                         have one, turn off the main and
                                                                drain the entire water system by
          • you have lead pipes, look for ice
            If
            where the pipe wall has cracked.                    turning on all the faucets.
          • Water pipes will freeze only in an
            uninsulated roof space, outside, or
            in a house with no central heating.           4 Repair joint
                                                               • Thaw the joint (see box below).
      2 Repair
        •
               burst pipe
             If the pipe wall is damaged,
                                                               • Unscrew the joint, wrap teglon
                                                                 tape around the threaded parts,
                                                                 then refasten the joint.
             wrap pipe repair tape
             around the crack.
           • Thaw    pipe (see box
             below) if necessary.
           • Call a plumber
             to make a
             permanent
             repair.

          Wrap pipe repair
          tape around the
                                                          !    The teglon tape will
          damaged pipe to                                      strengthen the seal
          seal it

      T H AW I N G F R O Z E N P I P E S

      • If, during winter, you turn    • If there are cracks, then
        on a faucet and no water         proceed to step 2 above
        comes out, the pipe may          before thawing the pipe.
        be frozen.
                                       • Use a hot-water bottle, hot
      • Find the pipe that feeds it,     cloths, or a hairdryer to
        and tap it gently with a         gently heat the pipe or joint.
        mallet; you will hear a dull     If the water inside boils, the
        thud at the frozen section,      pipe may burst.
        which may be bulging under
                                       • Do not use a blowtorch
        the pressure of the ice.         to thaw any type of
      • Check the pipe carefully         pipework: the intense heat                      Apply gentle heat
        for any cracks.                  is likely cause damage.                         to the frozen area
                                                              PLUMBING PROBLEMS               189

 BLOCKED SINK

1 Use
  •
      sink plunger
    Smear petroleum jelly around the
                                            CLEAR BOTTLE TRAP

    rim of a sink plunger.                   • If the sink is still blocked, place a bucket
                                               underneath the bottle trap below the
  • Block the overflow outlet with a           sink and unscrew the base.
    piece of cloth, then position the
    plunger over the drain. Run              • Push a clotheshanger or “snake”(a
    2 in (5 cm) of water into the sink.        flexible length of metal) down the drain
                                               to try to push the blockage out.
  • Pump vigorously for a few minutes
    to clear a minor blockage.               • If this is unsuccessful, try working up
                                               through the trap bottom and along the
  • If this fails, use                         waste pipe. Try to pull any debris back
    a commercial
                                               toward you
    drain cleaner or
                                               rather than
    pour carbonated
                                               pushing it
    soda dissolved
                                               further away.
    in hot water
    down the drain.                          • Replace the
                                               trap base
                                               and fasten
    Block the overflow                         securely.
    outlet with a cloth
                                              Remove the base
                                              of the bottle trap
    Pump the plunger
    over the drain

2 Check U-bend                            3 Check main drain
  • For a U-bend with a drain plug (a      • If the pipe remains blocked, there
    small capped outlet at the bottom        could be a problem in the drain.
    of the U section), put a bucket in     • Call a drain cleaner to come and
    place, then unscrew the plug using       clear the drain.
    a wrench.
  • Wedge a piece of wood in the
    U-bend to keep it
    steady as you
    work. Clear any
    debris, then replace
    the drain plug.                                    Unscrew both sides
                                                       of the U-bend to
  • For a removable                                    remove blockage
    U-bend, unscrew
    the joints and lift
    out the U section,
    draining the water
    into a bucket. Clear
    debris from the
    pipe, then replace                                 Place a bucket underneath
    the U section.                                     to catch water
190    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       LEAKING FAUCET

      1 Turn off water                          2 Call plumber
        • A leaking faucet is both a nuisance    • Most leaking faucets are caused
          and a waste of valuable water.           by faulty washers.
        • In cold weather, dripping water        • You will need to remove the faucet
          can freeze in the pipes overnight,       cover to replace a washer, which
          which may cause pipes to burst.          may be tricky if you have modern
                                                   faucets that are complex in design.
        • In hard water areas, a faucet that       If you feel unsure about tackling
          keeps dripping may stain sinks
          and baths with mineral deposits.         the job, call a plumber.
        • Before starting on any repair
          work, turn off the water supply.        SILENCING DRIPS
        • Close the “speedy” on the pipe,
          if it has one.                          • Until a faucet can be repaired, silence the
                                                    noise by tying a piece of string around its
                                                    spout. Put the other end of the string in
                                                    the drain. The water should now trickle
                                                    down the string and into the drain.

       AIRLOCK IN PIPE

      1 Release air                             3 Use
                                                  •
                                                      garden hose
                                                   If this fails, connect one end
        • If no water comes out and the pipe
          makes a banging noise when you           of a garden hose to the faulty
          turn on a faucet, there is probably      faucet and the other end to a
          an air lock in the pipe.                 main-fed faucet, such as the
                                                   kitchen sink faucet.
        • You may be able to release the air
          by using a rubber mallet to            • Turn on the faulty faucet, then
          tap along the                            the main-fed one. The pressure
          pipe leading                             of the main water as it enters the
          from the                                 faulty faucet should drive the air
          faucet.                                  lock out of the pipe.
                                                 • When the pipe stops banging,
                                                   turn off the faucets and remove
        Tap the pipe                               the hose from the main faucet.
        gently to dislodge
        the airlock                              • Drain off the water in the hose,
                                                   then disconnect the hose from
                                                   the faulty faucet.

      2 Turn on faucets                          • If air locks occur repeatedly, call
                                                   a plumber.
        • If you cannot find the air lock in
          this way, turn all the faucets on
          full to try to drive out the air.
                                                                PLUMBING PROBLEMS     191

 BLOCKED TOILET

1 Try
  •
      to clear toilet
    If the contents of the toiletbowl do
                                           3 Use
                                             •
                                                 plunger
                                               If the toilet is still blocked, get
    not flow away when the toilet is           a toilet plunger or improvise by
    flushed, the toilet is blocked.            tying a plastic bag around the
  • Do not keep flushing in the hope           head of an old mop.
    that this will remove the blockage:      • Pump    the plunger up and down
    water may build up in the bowl             in the bowl, but be careful not to
    and overflow.                              use too much force: you risk
  • Use  a bent wire coat hanger or a          cracking the bowl.
    snake to remove a blockage just          • If the toilet
    beyond the bend.                           remains blocked,
                                               or you prefer
                                               not to try

2 Try water force                              any of these
                                               techniques,
                                               call a plumber.
  • If this fails, bail some water out
    of the bowl to reduce the level.
  • Pour  a bucket of water into the
    toilet. If the blockage is minor,
    the force of the water rushing          Plunge firmly but
    down into the bowl can be               carefully so that you
    enough to dislodge it.                  do not crack the bowl

 DRIPPING OVERFLOW PIPE

1 Locate problem                           2 Check float valve
  • A dripping overflow pipe from
    a water tank or toilet cistern
                                             and float
    indicates that the correct water         • Check the float valve first. If the
    level is not being maintained.             washer is worn, water will continue
                                               to trickle into the tank or cistern
  • Do  not ignore a dripping overflow:        even when the float has reached
    the drip could suddenly turn into a        its uppermost position.
    serious leak, which could cause a
    flood, or the water may freeze and       • Examine the float to see if it
                                               is leaking. Give it a shake to see
    result in a burst pipe.                    whether there is water inside.
  • Look in the water tank or lift           • If necessary, buy a new washer or
    the cover of the cistern. Floating         float to replace the faulty one.
    on the water is an object attached
    to the tank or cistern side. This
    float is joined to a float valve,
    which should close off the supply
    from the main when the tank or
                                           3Call plumber
                                             • If the valve is broken, you will
    cistern is full.                           need to call a plumber to repair it.
192   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      Central-heating problems
      A hot-water heating system – which is composed of a boiler and circulator,
      radiators or baseboard, and an expansion tank – can stop working if the
      circulator jams, or if a radiator develops a leak or has air trapped in it.
      Dealing with these problems is usually straightforward. Use the action
      plan to identify the problem, then follow the instructions on the opposite
      page. Alternatively, call a plumber or heating specialist.

                                  ACTION PLAN

              What is your              Are the timer             Is the circulator
  START         heating                and thermostats                pumping
               problem?                 set correctly?                 water?

             Single radiator
                                              Yes                         Yes
              not working

              No radiators
                                               No                         No
               working

               Radiator or
              joint leaking                                           ACTION
                                          ACTION
                                                                 TRY RELEASING AN AIR
                                      RESET THERMOSTATS
                                                                 LOCK IN THE PUMP
                                      OR TIMER
                                                                 (see Circulator
                                                                 jammed, p.193)

             Is any part of
              the radiator              Is the joint or
                 warm?                   the radiator                 ACTION
                                        itself leaking?          CALL IN A PLUMBER
                                                                 TO FIX YOUR SYSTEM
                    Yes
                                             Joint

                    No                                                ACTION
                                           Radiator              SEAL HOLES IN
                                                                 RADIATOR (see Radiator
                                                                 leaking, p.193)

                                           ACTION
                ACTION                REPAIR JOINT (see               ACTION
                                      Radiator leaking,
           BLEED RADIATOR             p.193)                     CHECK VALVE IS OPEN
           (see Radiator not                                     (see Radiator not
           working, p.193)                                       working, p.193)
                                                  CENTRAL-HEATING PROBLEMS            193

 RADIATOR NOT WORKING

1 Check
  •
        valve
    Check that the valve at the bottom
                                          3 Bleed
                                            •
                                                  radiator
                                              Install an air bleed key on the air
    of the radiator is fully open.            bleed valve at one end of the top
                                              of the radiator.
                                            • Hold a cloth underneath the valve
2 Check
  •
        thermostats
    Look at the main central heating
                                              and turn the key counterclockwise
                                              until you hear air hissing out.
    thermostat and the radiator’s           • Turn the key clockwise as soon as
    own thermostat (if present) to            water, which may be hot, starts
    check that both are set correctly.        dripping out.

 RADIATOR LEAKING

1 Find leak                               3 Seal small hole(s)
  •Pinpoint the source of the leak.         • Run a hose from the central
   Water can escape through a loose           heating drain valve (usually under
   joint between the pipe and radiator;       the boiler or on the last radiator
   or through tiny holes in the               in the system) to a drain or sink,
   radiator, caused by corrosion.             then drain the system. The sealant
                                              flows through and seals the leak.

2 Repair
  •
         joint
    Tighten the nut with a pipe wrench.
                                            • The  sealant is only a temporary
                                              repair, so replace the radiator soon.

  • If water still leaks, turn off the
    heating and call a plumber.

 CIRCULATOR JAMMED

1 Find
  •
       valve
    Turn off the circulator (this will
                                          2 Release
                                            •
                                                    air lock
                                              Expel any air from the circulator
    be near the boiler) and find the          as if you were bleeding a
    bleed valve.                                           radiator (see above).
  • Place a screwdriver                                  • If the circulator is
    in the bleed valve                                     still jammed, call a
    and have a cloth                                       plumber or central
    ready to catch the                                     heating specialist.
    water that will be
    released when the
    air lock is released.                                  Turn bleed valve
                                                           to release air lock
194   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      Air-conditioning problems
      There are two main types of air conditioning: central systems and single-room
      units. Both circulate clean air that is cool in the summer and warm in the winter.
      Problems with central air conditioners are generally best dealt with by an air-
      conditioning specialist, but you can usually perform basic maintenance of
      room units yourself, such as checking thermostat settings, cleaning the filter,
      repositioning the sensor, and cleaning the condenser.

                                   ACTION PLAN

             Is the system                                            ACTION
                                           Is the fan
  START          or unit                                         CLOSE THEM.
                                           blowing?
               humming?

                    Yes                        Yes                Are the doors
                                                                  and windows
                                                                     open?
                    No                         No

                                                                          Yes
                                           ACTION
                                      SUSPECT THAT A FUSE                 No
                                      HAS BLOWN. CHANGE
                                      THE FUSE (p.197).
                ACTION
           THE SENSOR OF A
           ROOM UNIT MAY                   Does the                   ACTION
           NEED REPOSITIONING           system or unit           THE FILTER MAY
           OR THE CONDENSER
                                       cut out or have           NEED CLEANING
           MAY NEED CLEANING
           (see Air conditioner
                                         short cycles?           (see Inefficient air
                                                                 conditioner, p.195).
           cuts out, p.195).
                                               Yes

                                               No                      Is the
                                                                    thermostat
                                                                   set correctly?
                ACTION
                                           ACTION
           IF YOU STILL HAVE NOT
                                                                          Yes
           SOLVED THE PROBLEM,        THE THERMOSTAT MAY
           ASK A SPECIALIST TO        NEED RESETTING
           CHECK THE SYSTEM           (see Inefficient air
                                                                          No
           OR UNIT.                   conditioner, p.195).
                                                     AIR-CONDITIONING PROBLEMS          195

 INEFFICIENT AIR CONDITIONER

1 Reset thermostat                        3 Clean filter
  • If the air conditioner is switched        • Clean the filter with some warm
    on but the fan is not blowing,              water containing a mild detergent,
    check the temperature setting on            then rinse it in clean water and
    the thermostat. If the thermostat           dry it thoroughly.
    is set too high for the current           • Replace the filter and turn the
    conditions, the air conditioner             unit back on.
    will not be stimulated to operate.
  • Reset   the thermostat to a lower
    temperature. The fan should start
    to work right away.
                                           Clip filter back
                                           into place after

2 Remove filter
                                           cleaning

  • If the fan is working efficiently
    but the room or house is still too
    warm, the filter may need either
    cleaning or replacing (depending
    on the type of air conditioner).
                                          4 Install new filter
                                              • If your unit has a disposable filter,
  • For a central system, ask an air-           check its condition. If it has turned
    conditioning specialist to clean or         black, is warped, or has holes in
    replace the filter, as appropriate.         it, then it needs replacing.
  • For a room unit, unplug the unit          • Remove    the old filter and replace
    at the wall. Remove or lift up the          it, following the manufacturer’s
    front panel, depending on the               instructions. Then replace the front
    design, and remove the filter.              panel, and turn the unit back on.

 AIR CONDITIONER CUTS OUT

1 Reposition sensor 2 Clean condenser
  • For a room unit, unplug the unit
                      •                         For a wall-mounted room unit,
    at the wall. Remove the front               remove the condenser (the part
    panel and filter.                           of the unit outside the room) first.
  • Check the thermostatic sensor; it           The condenser in a window-
    should be near, but not touching,           mounted room unit can be
    the evaporator coils. Move it away          cleaned in place.
    from the coils if necessary.              • Use a vacuum cleaner to remove
  • Replace the filter and front panel          the dust and lint that has collected
    and plug in the unit.                       on the condenser.
  • For a central system, get an              • For a central system, get an air-
    air-conditioning specialist to              conditioning specialist to clean the
    reposition the sensor for you.              condenser for you.
196   HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

      Electrical problems
      We all take electricity for granted – flick a switch and a light comes on, plug
      in the television and it works – but fuses can blow, electrical equipment can
      malfunction, and wiring can become damaged or overheated, posing a potential
      fire hazard. By equipping yourself with some basic electrical knowledge, you will
      be able to rectify common problems quickly when they occur.

                                  ACTION PLAN

                Has one                   ACTION                    ACTION
  START         electrical            CHECK THE CIRCUIT         TURN ON MAIN
              appliance or            BREAKER BOX FOR A         SWITCHES AND
             several failed?          BLOWN FUSE OR             CIRCUIT BREAKERS
                                      “OFF” CIRCUIT (p.198)

                 Several
                                                                  Are the main
                                        Are lights or             switches and
                   One                 appliances in             circuit breakers
                                       only one area              switched on?
                                         affected?
               Have you                                                 No
             checked both                     Yes
             the plug and
             fuse (p.197)?                                              Yes
                                               No
                   Yes
                                                                    Do your
                                                                   neighbors
                   No                  Have you lost              have power?
                                         electricity
                                        throughout
                                        the house?                      Yes
               ACTION
           PLUG A WORKING
           APPLIANCE INTO THE                 Yes                       No
           OUTLET. IF APPLIANCE
           FAILS, REPLACE THE
           OUTLET (p.199)
                                               No
                                                                    ACTION
                                                                THERE IS PROBABLY
               ACTION
                                                                A LOCAL POWER
           REPLACE FUSE OR                                      FAILURE. REPORT
                                          ACTION
           REWIRE PLUG IF                                       PROBLEMS TO YOUR
           NECESSARY (p.197)          CALL AN ELECTRICIAN       ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER
                                                                                   ELECTRICAL PROBLEMS                   197

    FAULTY APPLIANCE
                                                                               ESSENTIALS
1 Check plug
       • Loosen the large screw between the
                                                                ELECTRICITY TOOL KIT
         pins and remove the plug cover.                        • Flashlight and batteries
                                                                • Spare plugs
       • Check the wiring inside the plug                       • Plug fuses
         for loose connections.                                 • Fuse wire (for rewirable fuses) or cartridge
                                                                  fuses (for replaceable fuses)
       • Check that each wire is securely
         attached to the correct terminal –                     • Outlet analyzer
         black to Hot, white to Neutral, and                    • Voltage tester (for checking whether live
                                                                  electricity is present)
         brown (if present) to Ground (see
         Rewiring a plug, below).                               • Small screwdriver
                                                                • Wire cutters/strippers
       • If the plug is a sealed unit, you will
         have to call an electrician to check
         why the appliance is not working.

            DO’S AND DON’TS
                                                           2 Check fuse
                                                                • Turn off appliances on the circuit,
                                                                  if known.
DO                          DON’T
• Turn off appliances       • Touch plugs, outlets,             • Locate the fuse box and examine
    at the wall outlet          or switches if your               the filament strips visible through
    when not in use.            hands are wet.                    the mica window of each fuse.
•   Switch off the wall     •   Replace a blown fuse
                                                                • blown fuse has a melted strip,
                                                                  A
    outlet and remove           with one of higher
    the plug before you         amperage: this can                seen through a halo of smoky
    attempt to repair           result in overheated              metallic residue.
    an appliance                wiring and fire.
                                                                • Unscrew   the threaded ceramic fuse
•   Have your wiring        •   Attempt electrical
                                                                  from its receptacle, and replace it
    checked by a                work unless you are
    professional at least       confident that you                with one of the same amperage.
    once every 5 years.         know what to do.
                                                                • Turn fixtures and appliances on
                                                                  again, one by one.

REWIRING A PLUG

• Remove the plug cover,               • Cut each wire to length (each        Hot wire                   Ground wire
    loosen the terminal screws,           one should be long enough           (black)                    (brown)
    and ease out the cord.                to reach its terminal) and use
                                          wire strippers to remove 1⁄4 in
• Position the cord on the
    plug with the wires placed in         (6 mm) of insulation from
    their correct positions to            the end of each wire.
    gauge whether you need to          • Replace the cord in the
    remove any of the cord’s              plug, fit the cord grip
    outer insulation.                     loosely, and push each wire
                                          carefully into its terminal.
• If necessary, use wire strippers
    to cut away 2 in (50 mm) of        • Tighten each terminal screw                                      Neutral
    the outer insulation, then            down on to its wire and refit
                                                                                                          wire (white)
    reposition the cord.                  the plug cover.
198    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT FAILURE

      1 Look for faulty                               2 Check circuit
        cartridge fuses                                 breakers
        • When power fails in one part of               • Most modern homes are now
          the house, turn off the affected                equipped with circuit breaker
          appliances and lights right away                switches instead of less consumer-
          and then go to the service/fuse box.            friendly ceramic, cartridge, or
        • If the service has cartridge fuses,             rewirable fuses. Many local codes
          turn off the fuse box toggle switch             require them because they are
          and open its cover.                             not as prone to consumer error
                                                          in replacement.
        • You will need to determine which
          fuse has blown using a continuity             • Most circuit breakers have a key
          tester. Remove each fuse, touch                 identifying the rooms affected by
          one end with the alligator clip of              each switch.
          the tester, and the other with the            • If your unit has miniature circuit
          probe. If the bulb of the tester                breakers (MCBs), look for one in
          does not light, the fuse is blown.              the “off” position and simply flick
        • Replace the blown fuse(s) with one              it back on, or push the reset button.
          of the same amperage.

          Replace
          the faulty
          cartridge
          fuse

                                                         Push the switch
                                                             back to the
                                                          “on” position

                                                      3 Identify recurrent
      ! Replacing fuse wire
        • Rarely, some homes will have fuses
                                                        fault
                                                        • If the MCB switch will not stay in
          with replaceable wires. These must              the “on” position, or the fuse blows
          be replaced with wires rated with the           again when you turn the power
          same gauge as the melted one! Call              back on, try to identify the fault.
          an electrician to check the service and       • Check to see whether any light
          to replace fuse wires.                          bulbs have blown, then switch off
        • Never use any conductor (wire, strip,           all appliances on that circuit and
          coin, or foil) as a substitute for a fuse       switch them back on one at a time.
          or fuse wire.                                 • you cannot find the cause of the
                                                          If
                                                          problem, call an electrician.
                                                               ELECTRICAL PROBLEMS      199

 FAULTY WALL OUTLET

1 Look for signs                           2 Replace outlet
  of damage                                   • If possible, buy a new outlet that
                                                is identical to the old one so the
  • Check for scorch marks on an out-           wires will be in the same place.
    let or around the base of plug pins;
    these indicate poor connections.          • Switch off the power at the circuit
                                                breaker/fuse box and take out the
  • you have already checked or
    If                                          relevant fuse (or flip the switch to
    fixed the plug (p.197), and the             the “off” position if your unit
    appliance works in another socket,          has MCBs).
    the outlet is probably faulty and
    will need to be replaced.                 • Remove the fixing screws from
                                                the outlet and pull it out of its
  • If any part of the outlet is wet, do        bracket. Note which wires lead to
    not attempt to replace it – ask an          which outlet terminals.
    electrician to do it for you.
                                                                 • Loosen the
                                                                   terminals to free
                                                                   the conductor
                                                                   wires, then
                                                                   connect the wires
                                                                   to the correct
                                                                   terminals of the
                                                                   new outlet.
                                                                 • Put the new outlet
                                                                   into the old
  Reconnect the
                                                                   mounting bracket
  wires to the                                                     and screw it
  new outlet                                                       into place.

 WORN ELECTRICAL WIRE

1 Look for signs                           3 Make repair
  of damage                                   • If the inner wires are undamaged,
                                                wrap insulating tape around the
  • If the sheathing on an electrical           cord as a temporary measure until
    cord is damaged or worn, you                an electrician can replace it.
    could be electrocuted if you
    touch the exposed inner wires.
                                            Extend the
                                            tape beyond

2 Check inner wires                         the damaged
                                            area on
                                            both sides
  • Unplug the cord at the wall.
  • If the inner wires are damaged,
    do not use the appliance until an         Wrap the tape in
    electrician has replaced the cord.        overlapping layers
200     HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

        Structural problems
        Most structural problems can be prevented by performing regular internal
        and external maintenance checks. Look at the condition of your windows,
        doors, roof, walls, fences, and drains, and deal with minor defects immediately
        before they become major problems. Even in a well-maintained home, however,
        there is plenty that can go wrong – windows get broken, doors stick, roof tiles
        fall off, and holes appear in gutters – but the advice here will help you at least
        make a temporary repair before seeking expert advice.

        SECURING BROKEN PANE OF GLASS

      1 Make cracks safe                                     2 Cover shattered
        •   If the glass is cracked, cover the
            crack(s) with clear, self-adhesive
                                                                pane
            waterproof repair tape on both                      • If the glass is shattered, cover the
            sides of the glass to hold it                         outside of the hole with a sheet of
            together temporarily.                                 polyethylene and secure it to the
                                                                              frame with battens and
          • Either  replace the
                                                                              pins or strong tape.
            pane yourself (see
            opposite) or get a                                             • For greater security,
            glazier to do the                                                 screw a sheet of 1⁄2-in
            job for you.                                                      (12-mm) thick ply-
                                                                              wood over the inside
                                                                              of the broken door or
                                                                              window pane.
          Tape over the
                                                                           • If you feel that you
          cracks carefully                                                    can do the job, replace
          to avoid breaking                                                   the glass yourself (see
          the glass                                                           opposite), or ask a
                                                                              glazier to do it for you.

      CHOOSING AND MEASURING FOR REPLACEMENT GLASS

      • Safety glass is reinforced in manufacture and must   • Measure the height and width of the opening,
        be used when glazing a very large area, such as        going right into the groove cut for the glass in
        a patio door or picture window, where it could         the frame. Cut away any old putty or remove
        be mistaken for an opening, or where glass will        old bead to make sure. Since the cavity may not
        be fitted within 31 in (80 cm) of the floor.           be square, take two measurements on each
                                                               dimension and use the mid-point as your figure.
      • There are three types of safety glass: toughened
        glass, laminated glass, and wired glass. If you      • Measure the two diagonals of the opening.
        need to use safety glass, discuss with your glass      If they are not the same, make a cardboard
        merchant which type is most suitable for the           template to give to your glass supplier.
        window or door in question.
                                                             • Buy a pane of glass that is ⁄ in (3 mm) smaller
                                                                                          1
                                                                                              8

      • If the glass is patterned, take a piece to match       than the cavity on each dimension; also buy
        with the new glass.                                    some putty and some glazing points.
                                                              STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS            201

 REPLACING DAMAGED PANE OF GLASS

1 Remove old glass                             3 Secure new glass
  • Put on strong protective gloves              • Fix the glass into position with
    and safety glasses.                            glazing points spaced about 20 cm
  • If the glass is only cracked, run a            (8 in) apart. Tap them gently into
    glass cutter around the edge about             the frame with a small hammer,
    1 in (25 mm) from the frame. Place             ideally a pin hammer.
    self-adhesive tape across the cracks,                    Keep the hammer head parallel
    then tap the glass with a hammer.                        to the pane of glass
    It should come away in one piece.
  • If the glass is shattered, sweep up
    the debris, then pry out any loose
    pieces still in the frame. Use an old
    chisel and hammer to remove pieces
    from around the edges, with the
    old putty. Work from the top of
    the frame downward.
  • Use pliers to extract the glazing
    sprigs (the tiny nails used to hold
    the glass in place), then brush the
    frame to remove small fragments.
  • Dispose  of the broken glass safely.
                                                 • Remove any surplus putty on the
                                                   inside edge of the glass with a wet
2 Insert new glass                                 putty knife (a small, pointed,
                                                   wide-bladed knife).
  • Wet your hands and then knead                • Roll some more glazing putty into
    some putty to make it pliable.
                                                   a thin sausage and press it into the
    Working on the outside of the
                                                   join between glass and frame all
    window, press a continuous putty
    line all around the edge where the             around the outside of the window.
    glass will rest using your thumb.            • Smooth it by holding the putty
                                                   knife at a 45° angle to the frame,
  • Place the glass, lower edge first,
    on to the putty and press it firmly            with the flat of its blade on the
    into place, leaving a 1⁄8-in (3-mm)            putty, and pulling it along. Miter
    gap all around.                                the corners.
                             Press until the     • Allow the putty to dry for at least
                             putty squeezes        2 weeks before painting.
                             out on the
                             inside of           • the glass is held by beading, apply
                                                   If
                             the glass             a strip of self-adhesive plastic foam
                                                   around the outside edge of the glass
                                                   before pinning on the beading.
                                                 • Repaint the frame, brushing a
                                                   1
                                                     ⁄8-in (3-mm) margin of paint onto
                                                   the glass to ensure that rainwater
                            Press around
                            the edges, not         will not get behind the putty and
                            in the middle          into the wood frame.
202    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       DOORS AND WINDOWS THAT STICK

      1 Remove paint                                     3 Prevent dampness
        layers                                                • A door that is sticking in damp
                                                                weather but fits perfectly well in
        • A build-up of paint layers can                        dry weather is absorbing moisture,
          cause doors and windows to stick.
                                                                probably through an unpainted
        • Strip off all the paint back to bare                  top or bottom edge. Ideally, wait
          wood, then repaint.                                   for dry weather before painting it.
                                  Plane to bare wood on
                                  the edge that is sticking
                                                              • If the bottom edge of a door is
      2 Plane door                                              unpainted, take the door off its
                                                                            hinges, then paint all
                                                                            the surfaces and
        • If a door or window catches
          as you close it, take it off                                      rehang it.
          its hinges, plane a                                             • If this does not solve
          little off the top,                                               the problem, plane the
          bottom, or side,                                                  sticking edge, smooth
          depending on                                                      it with sandpaper, if
          where it catches,                                                 necessary, then paint
          then rehang it.                                                   and rehang as before.

       DAMAGED WINDOW JOINTS

      1 Make temporary                                   2 Make permanent
        repair                                                repair
        • Joints that shrink as the wood dries                • For a permanent, and more sightly,
          out can cause a window to sag.                        repair, remove the window and
        • sash window will need to be
          A                                                     unscrew the frame.
          removed for repairs (see step 2).                   • Pry the loose joint open and
        • prominent casement window can
          A                                                     squeeze some PVA woodworking
          be temporarily repaired in place                      adhesive into the gap.
          until you have time to make                           • Hold the joint in an adjustable
          a permanent repair (see step                            sash clamp until it has set, then
          2). If the window is not in a                            replace the window.
          prominent position, most
          repairs can be done in place.
        • Unscrew the frame a little
          and then pry the loose joint
          open slightly. Squeeze some
          PVA woodworking
          adhesive into the gap.                                                       Place the joint
                                                                                       in a pipe clamp
        • Screw an L-shaped metal                                                      and leave until
          bracket across the joint to                                                  the adhesive
          hold it together.                                                            has dried
                                                           STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS           203

 DAMAGED SASH WINDOWS

1 Ease sticking parts 2 Damaged or
  • If a sash window sticks a little, rub
    a candle on to the sliding parts and
                                              broken sash cords
    put oil on the pulleys.                   • If the sash cords have broken,
                                                so that the top window crashes
  • If the window is sticking badly, it         down, you will need to get them
    is likely that a joint has dried out
    and needs repairing (p.202).                removed and replaced.
                                              • the meantime, you can make
                                                In
                                                the window safe by using lengths
                                                of wood to wedge it shut.

 Rub candle
                                              • Replacing  sash cords is not easy
 wax against                                    or a job for the amateur because
 the recess                                     replacement cords must be fitted
                                                with the correct weights. Get
                                                a window repairer to do the
                                                job for you.

 BADLY FITTING HINGES

1 Replace                                   3 Tighten screws
 protruding screws                            • If a hinge is too loose, the door
                                                or window will not hang properly.
 • Check the hinge screws. If the               Tighten loose screws or replace
   heads are protruding, a door or              them with longer screws.
   window will not close properly
   against the frame. Try screwing
   them in more tightly.
 • If this is unsuccessful, replace any
                                            4 Gain a hinge
   protruding screws with smaller-            • If a hinge is insufficiently recessed
   diameter, longer screws.                     into the frame, the door or window
                                                will not close properly.
                                              • Take the door or window off its
2 Shim
  •
       a hinge
   If a hinge is recessed too far into
                                              •
                                                hinges and remove the hinge.
                                                Use  a wood chisel to carefully cut
                                                a deeper recess for each affected
   the frame, the door or window                hinge, then replace the hinge.
   will not close properly.
 • Take the door or window off its                                           Enlarge
   hinges and remove the hinge.                                              the hinge
                                                                             recess
 • Shim   the recess with a piece of
   card the same size as the hinge.
 • Replace the hinge and rehang the
   door or window.
204    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       DEALING WITH WOOD ROT

      1 Assess damage                               3 Cut away
        • Rotten wood at the foot of doors or
          around window frames is usually
                                                      damaged wood
          caused by wet rot.                          • Chisel out all the decaying material
                                                        until you reach sound, solid wood.
        • Wet rot occurs when wood gets
          damp, often when water has seeped           • Coat the sound wood and
          through damaged paint. A first                surrounding woodwork with
          sign is often peeling paint.                  a chemical wet rot treatment.

        A sign of wet rot is
        wood that is dark
        brown and crumbly                           4 Apply wood
        when dry
                                                      hardener
                                                      • Brush a coat of wood hardener
                                                        on to the exposed wood. This
                                                        varnishlike liquid binds the loose
                                                        fibers of wood together and seals
                                                        the surface, making it ready for
                                                        replacement wood or filler.

                               A cotton-wool like
                               material and rust-
                               colored spores
                               indicate dry rot

        • If you can detect a strong, musty,
          mushroomy smell indoors, or see a
          white, cottonlike material below
          kickboards or through floor-
          boards, you may have dry rot.
        • Dry rot affects wood in badly
          ventilated confined spaces, and
          it spreads rapidly. Call in rot
          treatment specialists immediately.        5 Fill hole
                                                      • For extensive damage, use new
                                                        wood, treated with preservative,
      2 Treat cause of                                  to fill the main gap.
                                                      • For smaller gaps, use a special
        wet rot                                         two-part wood filler, following
        • Before repairing damaged wood,                the manufacturer’s instructions.
          try to find out why the wood has              Use wood filler also to fill any
          become damp. Check for a leaky                gaps around new wood.
          pipe or blocked drain.                      • Once the filler is dry, rub it down
        • Fix the cause of the dampness and             with sandpaper until smooth, then
          let the wood dry.                             paint, stain, or varnish.
                                                                 STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS          205

 BROKEN OR UNSTABLE FENCING

1 Replace panel                                  2Replace post
  • If a fence panel has been damaged              • If a fence post wobbles, it is rotten
    by an impact, blown over by high                 at the base and needs replacing.
    winds, or is in a state of disrepair,          • Detach the fencing on either side.
    you will need to replace it.                     If the fence is closeboarded, wedge
  • For a panel supported by wooden                  strong wood props under the top
    posts or recessed concrete posts,                edge to hold the fence in place
    remove the nails or angle brackets               while you work on the post.
    holding the panel in place at each
    end and remove the panel. Hold a
                                                   • For a post set in concrete, cut it
                                                     off at ground level, drive a metal
    new panel in place and reattach it.              repair socket into the centre of the
  • For a panel supported by grooved                 stump, then insert a new post cut
    concrete posts, slide the old panel              to the right length. Reattach the
    out and slide a new one in.                      fencing panels on either side.
                                Slot the fence
                                panel into the
                                                   • For a post not set in concrete, dig it
                                grooved
                                                     out and replace it with a new one.
                                concrete post      • Before  inserting the new post, soak
                                                     it in chemical preserver overnight
                                                     to protect it against rot.
                                                   • Anchor   the new post firmly into
                                                     the ground then reattach the
                                                     fencing panels on either side.

 BROKEN OR UNSTABLE GATE

1 Replace post                                   3 Secure hinges
  • A rotten gate post should be                   • If a gate is sagging, the hinges may
    replaced by a new wooden post                    need to be secured using longer or
    (see Replace post, above).                       thicker screws.
                                                  Reattach the hinges

2 Make gate stable
                                                  with stronger screws

  • If a gate is generally unstable,
    check the diagonal brace on its
    back. If the brace is not sound,
    replace it with a new one.
  • Alternatively, if a joint is loose,
    open the joint slightly and squeeze
    some waterproof adhesive into it.
    Use a metal bracket to keep the
    joint together, fixed with 1-in
    (25-mm) galvanized or alloy screws.
206      HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

         LEAKING ROOF

       1 Inspect the roof                                      2 Remove tiles/slates
         •    Look at your roof from the ground,                 • Wedge up the tiles or slates that
              using binoculars if necessary, to                    overlap the damaged one, then rock
              see if you can spot any slipped or                   it loose and slide it out carefully.
              missing tiles or slates.                           • Buy a matching tile or slate from
            • Go to the loft with a flashlight and                 your local construction store.
              inspect the roof from the inside.
            • If the roof is lined, check the lining
              for damp stains.
            • the roof is unlined, look for rays
              If
              of daylight between tiles.
            • Check roof timbers for dampness.
            • If the source of the leak is at a
              junction between the roof and
              other parts of the building, such
              as a wall or chimney, inspect the
              metal strips (flashing) that seal
              the join from the outside.
            • Once you have identified the source
              of the leak, make a temporary
              repair from inside (see box) if you
              can. Then call a roofing contractor              3 Install new
              to make a permanent repair.                        tile or slate
                                                                 • Slide the new tile or slate into
  T E M P O R A RY R O O F R E PA I R                              place on a builder’s trowel until the
                                                                   two nibs on the back of the tile or
                                   Push the plastic under          slate hook on to the roof battens.
                                   the damaged area
                                                                 • Remove the wedges that were
                                   Patch the hole                  propping up the surrounding
                                   Cut a sheet of strong           tiles or slates.
                                   plastic, at least 12 in
                                   (30 cm) larger than the
                                   hole. Slide it between
                                                               4 Repair flashing
                                   the roof battens and          • If flashing has deteriorated, it needs
                                   the tiles surrounding the       to be replaced by a roofing contrac-
                                   missing or damaged tile.        tor. Cracks or shrinkage, however,
                                                                   can be repaired relatively easily.
      Use the lower edge of the
          plastic sheet to drain                                 • the edge of the flashing has come
                                                                   If
      water away from the roof                                     away from the wall, push it back
                                                                   into the mortar course and apply
  Secure sheeting                                                  new mortar to secure it.
  Push the lower edge of                                         • If the flashing is cracked, cover
  the plastic out over the                                         it with aluminum self-adhesive
  lower edge of the hole, so
  that it directs water down                                       flashing tape, following the
  the roof. Secure it with                                         manufacturer’s instructions.
  strong waterproof tape.
                                                                  STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS          207

 LEAKING GUTTERS AND LEADERS

1 Check gutters                                   3 Repair faulty
  and pipes                                         gutter
  • If rainwater is overflowing from                • If the gutter is plastic, seal a
    the gutter, check both the gutter                 leaking joint by wrapping gutter
    and the leader leading from                       repair tape around it. If the gutter
    it for blockages. Obstructions are                is cracked, place tape over the
    commonly caused by a build-up                     crack inside the gutter.
    of leaves, birds’ nests or balls                • Repair a
    falling into leaders.                             sagging gutter
  • If water is leaking through the                   temporarily by
    gutter, check the dripping area                   hammering a
    of the gutter for cracks, holes,                  wooden wedge
    or bad joints.                                    in between the
                                                      gutter and each
  • the gutter is not damaged, check
    If
                                                      bracket to hold
    to see if it is sagging, which
                                                      each section
    prevents it from draining properly.
                                                      in place.
                                                    • If the gutter is metal, scrape off
2 Clear blockages                                     any rust, then paint the leaking
                                                      area with a sealing compound.
                                                      Protect the repair until the sealant
  • Put on protective gloves, and clear
    the gutter of leaves and debris so                has dried, then repaint.
    that water can flow freely.
  • Clear both ends of the leader.
  • If the blockage is caused by a bird’s
    nest, make a hook out of a length
    of stiff galvanized wire. Slide the
    wire down one side of the nest to
    hook it up and out of the pipe.
  • For  a blockage that is out of reach,
    use a long, flexible rod to clear it.

!Good maintenance
  • If leaves are a nuisance, secure protective
    mesh over the gutter and in the mouth
    of the leader. You will need to ensure
                                                    • To treat holes in metal gutters,
                                                      first put on safety goggles, then
    that there is no build-up of leaves over          wire-brush away any loose rust.
    the mesh, as this could cause rainwater
    to pour over the edge of the gutter.            • Apply a rust-proof primer, then
                                                      seal small holes with a sealing
  • Repaint metal drains and gutters                  compound and large holes with a
    frequently to prevent them from rusting
                                                      special glass-fiber filler. To finish,
    and developing holes or cracks.
                                                      apply tar or gloss paint.
208    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       Insects and pests
       As well as being a nuisance, insects can sting or bite; cockroaches, mice, and
       rats create unhygienic conditions; and woodworm can ruin woodwork. Take
       steps to eliminate insects or pests or call an exterminator.

       FLEAS

      1 Identify source                          2 Apply flea killer
        • Fleas are usually brought into the       • Buy a flea repellent/insecticide,
          house by the family pet. Make              preferably from a veterinary office.
          sure that all pets are regularly         • Vacuum carpets, then spray carpets
          treated with flea killer.                  and furnishings with flea killer,
        • Flea eggs can lie dormant in               especially under sofas and beds.
          carpets until they are activated         • Treat your pets and wash their
          by movement or warmth.                     bedding regularly.

        ANTS

      1 Use insecticide                          2 Use gelatin bait
        • Sprinkle ant insecticide powder          • If the insecticide is ineffective, put
          into the nest entrance or where            down poisoned gelatin bait; this
          ants are entering                                       will be taken back
          the house.                                              to the nest, killing
                                                                  the other ants.

          Sprinkle ant powder
          into any cracks
          where ants appear

       COCKROACHES

      1 Use
        •
            insecticide
          If you can find where cockroaches
                                                 2 Repeat
                                                   •
                                                          treatment
                                                     New cockroaches are likely to
          are hiding, spray the area well with       appear at 4-monthly intervals; be
          an insecticide.                            prepared to repeat the treatment.
        • If the cockroaches persist, contact      • Keep work surfaces clean and
          an exterminator.                           clear of any food.
                                                              INSECTS AND PESTS       209

 BEES, WASPS, AND HORNETS

1 Stay safe                               3 Treat
                                            •
                                                  stings
  • If you see a swarm of bees close to       Try not to antagonize bees, wasps,
    your house, get everybody inside          or hornets by spraying them with
    and shut all doors and windows.           insecticide; they are more likely
  • Contact  an exterminator.                 to sting you if they are angry.
                                            • If you are stung, refer to p.59
                                              for treatment. Bee stingers can be
2 Have nest sprayed                           removed, but wasps do not leave
                                              a stinger. If you develop a minor
  • If wasps or hornets bother you            allergic reaction, seek medical help.
    often, there is probably a nest.        • If you develop symptoms of
  • Contact an exterminator to                anaphylactic shock (p.28), seek
    deal with the nest.                       medical help immediately.

 WOODWORM

1 Identify signs                          2 Treat infestation
  • If you spot ⁄16-in (2-mm) holes in
                1
                                            • Brush surfaces with woodworm
    furniture or structural timbers,          fluid. On furniture, use an aerosol
    you have woodworm. Sawdust is             with a nozzle to inject the fluid.
    a sign that woodworm are active.        • To treat structural timbers
  • Minor woodworm attacks are                effectively, use a large sprayer.
    easy to treat (see step 2), but if      • treat flooring, lift every third
                                              To
    an infestation is severe, you             or fourth floorboard and spray
    should seek professional help.            thoroughly underneath.

 MICE AND RATS

1 Block entry holes                       3 Set traps
  • Small pellet-shaped droppings in        • Set three or four baited mouse
    your home indicate mice.                  traps where droppings are
                                              found in the house.
  • Look for any obvious entry holes
    into your home and block them.          • Use peanut butter, chocolate, or
                                              cooked bacon as bait for traps.

2 Put down bait                           4 Call rodent control
  • Put down poisoned mouse bait
    wherever you find droppings. Be         • Larger droppings indicate rats; call
    prepared to repeat if necessary.          your local health department.
210    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       Furniture and furnishings
       When accidents happen, it pays to clean up spills and stains quickly in order
       to avoid lasting damage to upholstered furniture and furnishings, especially
       carpets. Equip your home with a basic stain removal kit (see below) and you
       will be well-prepared to effectively tackle even the most stubborn stains.

       GREASE ON CARPETS

      1 Absorb grease                           2 Use carpet cleaner
        •  Place a piece of brown paper over       • To remove the remainder of the
           the mark. Put the tip of a warm             mark, rub carpet cleaner gently
           iron onto the paper and press it            into the carpet with a sponge.
           until the grease is absorbed into
           the brown paper.                        • If you have not used the cleaner on
                                                       a particular carpet before, check
                                                       for color fastness first by testing
                                                       the cleaner on an unobtrusive
                                                       area of the carpet.
                                                   • Wipe off the foam with a clean
                                                       sponge or cloth and inspect the
                                                       mark. If you can still see a stain,
                                                       or the stain reappears later, repeat
                                                       the stain removal treatment.

       GREASE ON UPHOLSTERY

      1 Apply talcum                            2 Brush off talcum
         powder                                    powder
         • Sprinkle a thick layer of talcum        • After 10 minutes, brush off the
           powder over the mark, covering            talcum powder.
           it completely, and leave until the      • Repeat if necessary.
           grease begins to be absorbed.

        Cover grease                                              ESSENTIALS
        with talcum
        powder                                     STAIN REMOVAL KIT
                                                   • Brown paper          • Upholstery cleaner
                                                   • Talcum powder        • Ammonia
                                                   • White kitchen        • Sponge
                                                       towels             • Aerosol grease
                                                   •   Carpet cleaner       remover
                                                  FURNITURE AND FURNISHINGS       211

 GREASE ON WALLPAPER

1 Blot grease                             2 Use iron
  • Use white kitchen towels to blot        • Warm an iron, switch it off, then
    the splash, working quickly so            press it onto the covering paper
    that the grease is not absorbed.          to draw out the grease.
  • Hold a piece of brown paper or          • Use an aerosol grease remover on
    wallpaper against the stain.              any remaining traces.

 RED WINE ON CARPETS

1 Flush spill                             2 Clean stain
  • Blot the spill immediately with         • Apply carpet cleaner. Work some
    white kitchen towels then sponge          of the foam into the stain with a
    it with warm water to flush out           sponge, always rubbing from the
    the stain. Pat the area dry.              edge of the stain inwards to
  • Alternatively,  pour white wine on        prevent it spreading.
    to the spill, blot up both liquids,     • Sponge the stain with clear water
    then sponge with clear, warm              to rinse it. Repeat the treatment
    water and pat dry.                        until the stain has disappeared.
  Flood the red wine stain                  Rub the foam gently into
  with white wine                           the stained area

 PET STAINS ON CARPETS AND UPHOLSTERY

1 Remove droppings 2 Remove urine
  • Wear rubber gloves.
                     •                        Clean the stain from a carpet or
  • Remove the dropping with a                upholstery using a cleaner that
    spoon, always scraping into the           contains a deodorant.
    stain to avoid spreading it.            • Alternatively, sponge the stain
  • Pour a few drops of ammonia into          with cold water and pat dry.
    warm water and use the mixture            Follow this by sponging the
    to sponge the stain clean. Repeat         stain again with cold water
    the treatment if necessary.               containing a little antiseptic.
212    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       Home security
       By identifying vulnerable areas of your home and taking adequate precautions,
       you can dramatically reduce the risk of being burglarized. Installing additional
       locks and bolts is an effective way of deterring thieves. Security devices such as
       peepholes, door chains, and alarms are also easy to install; and they not only
       safeguard your property but also provide peace of mind, particularly when you
       are away from home.

       ASSESSING YOUR HOME SECURITY

      1 Identify                                   3 Install patio door
         vulnerable areas                            locks
         • Check all your doors and windows          • Install locks and deadbolts (p.214)
           for strength and security. Imagine          at the top and bottom of patio
           that you have locked yourself out:          doors and French windows
           which window or door would you              to prevent them from being
           choose to force open or break?              forced open.
         • Look   at your house again and
           reassess your security.
         • Contact your local police               4 Install window
           department for advice.                    security devices
                                                     • Windows are popular points of
      2 Install main door                              entry for burglars.
                                                     • Secure windows with locks or
         security devices                              deadbolts to prevent the catches
                                                       being released through a smashed
         • Install locks on the front, back, and       window. There are several types
           any side doors. For added security,
           you should install heavy bolts at           for metal and wood windows.
           the top and bottom of the inside
           of each door.
         • Back and side doors must have
           sturdy locks because they are often
                                                   5 Assess
                                                     •
                                                            lighting
                                                       If you install security lighting to
           hidden from view and badly lit,             help you unlock your door on dark
           which means that a burglar can              nights, remember that this could
           attempt entry unobserved.
                                                       be equally useful to a burglar.
         • For  security when answering the
           door, install a strong door chain
           and peephole (p.213).
         • If a door opens outward, install        6 Consider an alarm
           hinge bolts to the back edge              • For the best security, either install
           (p.214) so that the door cannot be          a burglar alarm yourself or have
           levered open on the hinge side.             one installed professionally.
                                                                   HOME SECURITY        213

 SELECTING LOCKS

1 Check for quality                        2 Use strong
  • Always invest in high-quality
    locks. Cheap locks are more likely
                                             fasteners
    to rust and stick, which means           • If you install locks on your doors
    that they are not cost-effective          and windows, use long, strong
    in the long term.                         screws for maximum strength.
                                             • you are unsure, get a locksmith
                                              If
                                              to do the job for you.

 INSTALLING A DOOR CHAIN

1 Choose chain                             2 Attach plates
  • Choose a strong door chain and          • Hold the chain against the door,
    the longest and heaviest-gauge            ideally just below the lock.
    screws possible. The                                       • Make pilot holes
    chain’s strength                                             with a bradawl
    depends upon how                                             or drill so that
    well it is anchored to                                       both sections of
    the door and frame.                                          the chain are
                                                                 aligned, then
     Screw the fixing plates                                     secure both
     to the door and frame                                       fixing plates.

 INSTALLING A PEEPHOLE

1 Select viewer                            2 Fit peephole
  • Choose a telescopic viewer with as      • Using the correct-sized drill bit,
    wide an angle of vision as possible.       usually 1⁄2 in (12 mm), drill a hole
    You should be able to see someone          right through the door.
    standing to the side of the                            • Insert the barrel of the
    door or even crouching down.                             viewer into the hole
  • Before you buy the peephole,                             from the outside and
    make sure that the viewer is                             screw on the eyepiece
    adjustable to fit any door.                              from the inside.
  • Mark the best position for                             • Check that the lighting
    the peephole, ideally in the                             outside your front
    center of the door at eye level.                         door is bright enough
                                                             for you to be able
                Drill the hole for the                       to see out clearly
                peephole at eye level                        at night.
214    HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

       INSTALLING HINGE BOLTS

      1 Position
        •
                 bolts
          Wedge the door fully open and
                                                     2 Install
                                                       •
                                                               cover plates
                                                         At the marked points, drill holes
          mark the center of the hinge edge              into the door frame to the width
          of the door about 3 in (75 mm)                 and depth of the protruding bolts,
          in from both hinges.                           allowing a little more for clearance.
        • Drill holes at the marked points to          • Close the door to check that it shuts
          the width and depth specified by the           easily. Enlarge the width or depth
          manufacturer.                                           of the holes as necessary.
        • the bolts into the
          Fit                                                  • Open the door and hold
          holes and partially                                     cover plates over the holes.
          close the door so                                       Mark the edge of each
          that the bolts mark                                     plate with a pencil.
          the door frame.                                      • Chisel out the recesses so
                                                                  that the plates lie flush
                                                                  with the cover frame.
          Insert the bolts
          into the drilled holes                               • Screw the plates in place.

       INSTALLING A DEADBOLT

      1 Drill holes for the 2 Install bolt and plate
        barrel and key        •                          Screw the keyhole plate to the door.

        • Mark a central point on the front            • Insert the bolt into the hole. Then
                                                         draw around the faceplate to mark
          edge of the door where you want
                                                         its recess. Gain the wood with a
          to install the bolt.
                                                         chisel. Screw the bolt to the door.
        • Drill a hole at the marked point to          • Insert the key and turn the bolt to
          the width and depth given on the
                                                         mark the door frame. Then drill a
          manufacturer’s instructions.
                                                         hole to a depth that matches the
                                                         length of the bolt.
                                                       • the escutcheon over the hole.
                                                         Fit

                                    Drill into the
                                    opening edge
                                    of the door        Mark the
                                                       shape of the
                                                       faceplate
                                                       recess
        • Use a square to mark a line
          transferring the center of the hole
          to the inside face of the door.
        • Mark the keyhole, then drill a hole
          (see manufacturer’s instructions
          for width and depth) through the
          inside face of the door only.
                                                                     HOME SECURITY        215

 JAMMED LOCK

1 Add lubricant                              2 Work key
  • If a lock is jammed, do not try to         • Work the key gently in and out
    force the key to turn: you could            of the lock, adding a little more
    break the key in the lock.                  lubricant if necessary.
  • Apply   a few drops of penetrating         • this fails, either replace the
                                                If
    oil to the key, or dry lubricant,           cylinder if it is a cylinder lock (see
    such as graphite powder, to the             below) or replace the lock body of
    lock, to ease the problem.                  a mortise lock (see below).

 JAMMED CYLINDER LOCK

1 Remove cylinder                            2 Install new cylinder
  • If a cylinder lock is jammed (see          • Insert a new cylinder by sliding it
    above) or if you are worried about           into the cylinder hole and screwing
    the security of your existing lock,          it into place.
    replace the cylinder.                      • Put the lock body back in position
  • Unscrew    the lock body on the              and refix the holding screws.
    internal side of the door, then
    unscrew the cylinder.
  • Remove    the cylinder from its
    cavity by pulling it from the
    external side of the door.

                    Slide the new cylinder
                    into the existing
                    cylinder hole

 DAMAGED MORTISE LOCK

1 Replace striker                            2 Replace lock body
  plate                                        • If a mortise lock is jammed (see
                                                 above) or if you are worried about
  • If a striker plate is damaged,               the security of your existing lock,
    causing a door to stick as it closes,        replace the lock body.
    buy a replacement.
                                               • Unscrew the lock body and remove
  • Unscrew   the damaged striker plate          it from its mortise in the door.
    from its position in the door jamb.
                                               • Insert a replacement lock body into
  • Insert a replacement striker plate           the mortise and screw it into place.
    in exactly the same position and             If the fit is too tight, use a wood
    screw it into place.                         chisel to enlarge the recess slightly.
216     HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES

        DEALING WITH INTRUDERS

      1 Be vigilant                                              2 Make
                                                                   •
                                                                        a noise
                                                                        If you do enter your home and meet
        •    If you arrive home and see anyone
             loitering outside, pass by your                            an intruder, run out and shout or
             house and ask a neighbor to                                scream as loudly as you can.
             accompany you to the door.                               • Don’t try to apprehend him or her.
           • If you return home to find that
             the front door is open, do not
             enter your home. Move a safe
             distance away and, if you have
                                                                 3 Stay calm
             a cellular phone, call the police.                       • If you must face the intruder, keep
                                                                        calm and try not to provoke a
             Alternatively, go to a neighbor’s
                                                                        reaction by making threats.
             and phone the police from there.
                                                                      • Try to memorize as much as you
           • If you come home and your key                              can of the intruder’s appearance,
             won’t open the door, it could mean                         mannerisms, and speech so that
             that an intruder has secured the                           you can provide the police with
             door from inside so as not to be                           an accurate description.
             disturbed. Move away quickly
             and call the police.
           • If you return home to find that
             your home has been ransacked,                      4 Call the police
             call the police immediately. Do                          • Dial 911 or call your local police
             not touch anything until the police                        station.
             arrive so as not to destroy any                          • Try  to give the police as much
             fingerprints left by burglars.                             information as possible.

      DEALING WITH A NIGHT INTRUDER

      • If you are woken in the night by unusual           • Do not keep an offensive weapon or
        noises or the sound of breaking glass,               try to defend your property. No items,
        call the police.                                     however valuable, are worth serious
                                                             injury or death.
      • Keep your cellular phone turned on by
        the bed so that you can still call for help        • If you meet the intruder, stay calm and
        if the telephone line has been cut.                  try to memorize his or her appearance.
      • If you are alone in the house, talk loudly
        as if you have a companion in the room.
        You could also switch on the lights and
        make a lot of noise. Most intruders will
        leave as soon as they hear noise.
      • Do not go downstairs to investigate.

      Responding to a disturbance
      When you dial 911, you will be advised on whether
      to make a noise or to pretend that you are asleep.
      Stay in bed until the police arrive.
                                                                        HOME SECURITY       217

  COPING AFTER A BREAK-IN

1 Don’t move                                   4 Secure premises
    anything                                     • If burglars have forced entry by
                                                   smashing glass, make a temporary
    • If you discover that your home has           repair for security (p.200).
      been broken into, try to keep calm.
                                                 • Determine   how the burglar(s)
    • Do  not touch anything. The police           gained access to your home and
      will want to check the crime scene           take steps to make it more secure
      and look for fingerprints.                   by installing additional locks or
                                                   bolts (p.214).

2 Call police                                  5 Contact insurers
    • Dial 911 or call your local police         • Contact your insurance company
      station.                                     and explain what has happened.
    • When the police arrive, they will          • The   insurance company and/or
      talk to you about the burglary, ask          claims adjuster will require the
      what has been taken, then take a             complaint number and a detailed
      statement. They will then provide            list of what has been stolen.
      you with a complaint number for
      your insurance company.                                       Give your insurance
                                                                    company details of
                                                                    what has been
                                                                    stolen

3 List missing items
    • Start to make a list of what you
      think has been taken. This process
      can go on for days, because many
      items will be missed only when
      you try to find or use them. The
      police should supply you with a
      form for your list.
    • Give as clear a description as
      you can of all items, and provide
      photographs of valuables, if you
      have any.
    • Indicate on the list which, if any,
      items have been owner-labeled.
                                               6 Keep in contact
SEEKING ADVICE                                   with police
                                                 • If you move while the investigation
• If you are the victim of a burglary or           is still ongoing, notify the police of
  assault, you will be contacted by Victim         your new address.
  Support, an organization that provides
  counselling and help for victims of crime.     • If you discover more damage or
                                                   missing items, contact the officer
• Talk to friends and family about your            handling your case as well as your
  experience. They may be able to offer            insurance company.
  you reassurance and comfort.
                                      4
          NATURAL
DISASTERS
    Surviving any kind of natural disaster depends largely on being
prepared. If you know how to protect your home and family, how to
understand the early warnings, and how to evacuate if advised to do
  so, you will be ready for most disaster situations. Once a disaster
   is over, life may not return to normal for some time, so you also
 need to know how to cope with the consequences, including power
 cuts, damage to your home, and water shortages. If evacuated, you
  may even have to survive outside for a while before help arrives.

                       Planning for                            Tornado .......................236
                       disaster.........................220    Earthquake ..................238
                       Severe storm................226
                                                               Volcanic
                       Flood ............................228   eruption.......................240
                       Extreme cold................230         Tsunami........................242
                         Wildfire.....................232      Post-disaster
                            Hurricane.............234          survival.........................244
220   NATURAL DISASTERS

      Planning for disaster
      If you live in an area that is prone to certain types of natural disaster, planning
      and preparing for an emergency will help protect you and your family. Take
      steps to safeguard your home and property. Choose a safe place indoors to
      take shelter. If hurricanes are a threat, find out where your local shelter is,
      and assemble essential equipment that may help you survive the aftermath.

                                    ACTION PLAN

              Do you know                   Have you                    ACTION
  START      if any disasters                sought                 PROTECT YOUR FAMILY.
                 are likely              information on
                  (p.221)?               the disaster(s)?

                    Yes                         No                      Have you
                                                                        protected
                                                                       your family
                    No                          Yes
                                                                         (p.223)?

                                                                            No
                ACTION
                                            Have you
            CONTACT YOUR                    protected                       Yes
            CITY/TOWN COUNCIL.            your property
                                             (p.222)?

                ACTION                         Yes
                                                                     Do you have an
            PROTECT YOUR                                             evacuation plan
            PROPERTY.
                                                No                      (p.224)?

                                                                            Yes

                ACTION                       Do you
                                                                            No
            CHECK AND REPLENISH           have a disaster
            SUPPLIES REGULARLY.           emergency kit
                                           (pp.224–5)?
                                                                        ACTION
                ACTION                          Yes                 MAKE SURE YOU AND
                                                                    YOUR FAMILY KNOW
            PREPARE A KIT FOR
                                                                    WHAT TO DO.
            THE TYPE OF DISASTER
                                                No
            YOUR AREA FACES.
                                                               PLANNING FOR DISASTER         221

 ASSESSING YOUR RISK
 • Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes            • Flooding can occur almost anywhere,
  occur around geological fault lines;             although the most serious floods are
  both can produce tsunamis.                       usually caused by very high tides.
 • Hurricanes mostly affect areas                • Wildfires occur in many countries –
  around the Atlantic basin and the                80 percent are started by humans.
  Pacific basin, where they are known            • Extreme cold occurs in much of the
  as tropical cyclones. They are often             Northern Hemisphere but many
  accompanied by tornadoes.                        countries experience freezes in winter.

      High risk of seismic          High risk of severe            Areas at risk of
      activity (volcanic            climatic conditions            extreme cold
      eruptions, earthquakes,       (hurricanes, tornadoes,
      tsunamis)                     coastal flooding)              Tectonic plates

1 Be informed                                 2 Reduce risk
  •Contact your town/city council to               • Take steps now to protect your
   find out whether your area is prone                property against natural disasters.
   to any specific types of disaster. Ask             Your home will be less vulnerable
   for information about each type.                   if you take sensible precautions
 • If your area is prone to flooding,                 and carry out routine building
   contact your city/town council to                  maintenance (p.222).
   find the height to which a flood                • Protect your family by coming up
   could rise.                                        with a family disaster plan (p.223)
 • Before moving or traveling abroad,                 and making sure that you are all
   find out about potential disaster                  prepared for evacuation (p.224).
   risks in that area.                             • Always keep abreast of the weather
 • Learn   about the effects of disasters             situation and local plans regarding
   that may strike your area.                         shelters and evacuation.
222   NATURAL DISASTERS

      PROTECTING YOUR HOME
       • Have unsafe or old chimney stacks      • Check and, if necessary, repair any
         removed or repointed.                    obvious weaknesses, such as cracks
                                                  that are wider than 1⁄8 in (3 mm),
       • Replace cracked or broken slates
         or tiles on the roof (p.206). Check      in the structure of your house.
         that roof flashings are watertight.    • your area is at risk of flooding,
                                                  If
         If any are loose or damaged, have        make sure that you have sufficient
         them repaired or replaced (p.206).       sandbags to block all potential
                                                  water entry points, such as external
       • Keep gutters and leaders clear and
         in good repair (p.207).                  doors and vents (p.228).
       • If you live in an area prone to        • Ensure that all adults in the
         tornadoes or hurricanes, install         home know how to turn off gas,
         special hurricane shutters.              electricity, and water at the main,
                                                  in case you need to do so quickly.
       • Alternatively, install wooden frames
         on the windows so that you can         • Check that you have adequate
         board them up quickly (p.234).           insurance coverage for damage
                                                  caused by local disasters.

      PROTECTING YOUR POSSESSIONS
       • Make sure that shelves are securely    • Bolt tall pieces of furniture,
         fastened to the wall.                    boilers, and other heavy items to
                                                  the wall or floor (p.238) to ensure
       • Keep  heavier items on lower
                                                  that they are stable and secure.
         shelves so that if a disaster occurs
         and they fall, they are less likely    • Install additional devices to secure
         to injure anyone.                        heavy light fixtures to ceilings.
       • If flooding is a risk in your area,    • Keep a supply of bricks that you
         keep precious items on higher            can use to raise heavy furniture
         shelves to protect them from water       out of reach of flood water.
         damage. Alternatively, move your       • Keep a fire extinguisher and blanket
         most valuable possessions upstairs.      to put out minor house fires.

      PROTECTING YOUR YARD
       • Remove any diseased or broken tree
         branches that could be blown about
         by high winds. Thin out crowded
         branches to reduce wind resistance.
       • you live in an area that is prone
         If
         to wildfire, create a safety zone
         around your home (p.232).
       • During hurricane/tornado seasons,
         bring indoors or move into the
         garage any garden furniture or
         children’s play equipment that         Cut off any broken branches
         is not anchored to the ground.         before high winds rip them off
                                                                      PLANNING FOR DISASTER           223

    PROTECTING YOUR FAMILY

1 Be informed                                         3 Make a family
  •   Contact your city/town council to
      find out if warning signals will be
                                                         disaster plan
      issued and what action you should                  • Discuss how to prepare for disaster.
      take (see box below) in a disaster.                • Make sure that any children
                                                           understand the dangers of severe
    • If you live in an area that is prone                 weather and other disasters that
      to certain disasters, you may be
      given a telephone number to call                     threaten your area.
      for up-to-date information and                     • Some natural disasters, including
      warnings. You may also find advice                   lightning strikes, earthquakes, and
      on the Internet (see pp.250–251                      volcanic eruptions, can cause house
      for recommended websites).                           fires. Have a meeting place just
                                                           outside the home where you can
    • Prior to a disaster, public address                  check that everyone is safely out of
      systems such as bulhorns may be
      used to inform people quickly and                    the building in the event of a fire.
      provide instructions.                              • Arrange a second meeting place
                                                           some distance away, such as at a
    • If you are likely to be evacuated                    friend’s or relative’s home, should
      to an emergency shelter, find out
      beforehand where the nearest                         you have to leave the immediate
      shelters are and how to get to them.                 area. Make sure that everyone has
                                                           the address and telephone number.
                                                         • Choose at least two escape routes
2 Think ahead                                              from your home and each room.
                                                         • Identify safe places in your home
    • Keep emergency contact numbers                       where you could take shelter if
      near the telephone and ensure that                   you are advised to stay indoors or
      everyone knows where they are.                       if you do not have time to leave
    • Consider how to help the elderly                     before a disaster strikes.
      and physically disabled.                           • Make a family evacuation plan
    • Plan  how you are going to look                      (p.224).
      after pets. Keep pet carriers for                  • Discuss how to make contact and
      small family pets if necessary.                      reunite family members should a
    • Assemble   essential items that you                  disaster occur when you are not
      will need if disaster strikes (p.225).               all at home together.

U N D E R S TA N D I N G E A R LY WA R N I N G S

• If you live in a hurricane or tornado zone, be      • If you live in an area prone to flooding,
  prepared for a “watch” (indicates possible            a “watch” (possible) may be followed by a
  disaster) and then a “warning” (indicates             “warning” (imminent) and then a “severe
  probable or imminent disaster) as the                 warning” (imminent and severe).
  hurricane or tornado approaches your area.
                                                      • In areas of particular risk, there may be a
• If you live in a tsunami area, an “advisory” is       system for sending warning messages by
  the first alert, followed by a “watch” (possible)     telephone, fax, or pager directly to people
  and “warning” (imminent).                             whose homes are threatened.
224    NATURAL DISASTERS

       EVACUATING SAFELY

      1 Follow instructions 3 Take precautions
        •                     •
          Prepare to evacuate if you are told           If high winds are forecasted, bring
          to do so by your city/town council            children’s play equipment and
          or emergency services, or if you              garden furniture indoors (p.222).
          feel in danger in your own home.            • Call the friend/relative whose home
        • Follow   evacuation instructions              serves as your second point of
          carefully: there may be limits on             contact in your evacuation plan.
          what you can take with you.                   Explain where you are going.
                                                      • Use  telephones and cellular phones
                                                        only if it is essential to get in touch
      2 Gather family                                   with family or friends; otherwise,
                                                        keep lines free for emergency calls.
        members                                       • Always turn off the gas, electricity,
        • Assemble family members quickly,              and water before leaving.
          collect your disaster emergency kit         • Close  and lock all your external
          (p.225), and decide whether you               doors and windows as you leave,
          should leave by car or go on foot.            including doors to outbuildings.
        • Help the elderly and children
          evacuate. Leaving home in a
          disaster situation is distressing, so
          remain calm and be reassuring.
                                                    4 Be a good
          Older people might require                  neighbor
          particular help, such as the aid            • Make sure that your neighbors are
          of a wheelchair.                              aware of the need to evacuate.
        • Put small pets into pet carriers;           • Help elderly or disabled neighbors
          take dogs with you in the car or put          who may be unable to evacuate
          them on leashes if you are on foot.           without your assistance.

       PREPARING A DISASTER EMERGENCY KIT

      1 Organize basic                              2 Consider extras
        items                                         • If your area is at risk of a major
                                                        disaster, you may well have to
        • List the items you would need to              survive outside for several days.
          take with you in an evacuation (see           Plan to take water-purifying tablets.
          p.225 for suggestions).                       Have garbage bags and a plastic
        • The amount of equipment you will              bucket with a lid (to be used as a
          need depends on the type and extent           toilet) and rolls of toilet paper.
          of disaster likely to affect your area.     • If you live near a volcano, add a
        • Assemble these items.                         disposable dust mask and goggles
        • Encourage your children to help               for each family member.
          with the planning and packing of            • If you have a small pet, keep a
          your family emergency kit.                    pet carrier.
                                                                            PLANNING FOR DISASTER             225

3 Keep kit ready                                          4 Assess situation
 • Keep your disaster emergency kit                          • If evacuating by car, load your kit
   in a safe, accessible place, such as                        into the trunk.
   in the garage, and ensure that all                        • If evacuating on foot, decide how
   family members know where it is.                            much of the kit your family can
 • Practice  evacuating your home;                             carry.
   loading the kit into the car, and                         • In the case of a mass evacuation,
   leaving as quickly as possible.                             emergency shelter will be provided
 • Replace   your water supplies every                         in local community buildings. In
   6 months and regularly check the                            such situations you do not need to
   sell-by dates of all foods.                                 take food, water, or bedding.
 • Test  batteries regularly.                                • situations where it may be some
                                                               In
 • Note the expiration dates of first-                         time before you can return home,
   aid and prescription medicines.                             take plenty of clothing and toys or
   Replace those that have expired.                            games to keep children busy.

                      DISASTER EMERGENCY KIT

   MEDICAL EQUIPMENT            FLASHLIGHTS AND               CANDLES AND           BATTERY-POWERED
   Pack a first-aid kit and        BATTERIES                    MATCHES                  RADIO
    any over-the-counter      Have one flashlight per      These are for backup    Use this for news of the
       or prescription          family member, plus           lighting during a    disaster and emergency
     medicines needed         plenty of spare batteries   prolonged poweroutage        radio broadcasts

          WATER                     FOOD AND               FAMILY DOCUMENTS               BEDDING
 Store 8 pints (4.5 liters)        CAN OPENER              Keep passports and      Keep one sleeping bag
   of water per person         Store enough canned        family documents in a    or blanket per person
         per day                 or dried food for        waterproof wallet with    for sleeping outside
                                       3 days               emergency money

  BABY FOOD AND MILK          DIAPERS AND CREAMS           SHOES AND CLOTHES            RAINWEAR
   Take jars, cans, formula      Keep supplies of            Keep a change of        Have a lightweight,
     mixes, bottles and       disposable diapers and       footwear and clothing    waterproof jacket for
            spoons                 diaper cream               for each person       each family member
226    NATURAL DISASTERS

       Severe storm
           For FLOOD see p.228
       High winds during a severe storm can cause damage to roofing, chimneys, and
       windows, while heavy rain can cause leakage and flooding. Lightning can also
       be dangerous if you are out in the open. But there are steps you can take to cope
       with and protect against storms and lasting damage.

       COPING WITH A SEVERE STORM

      1 Take precautions                              2 Deal with leaks
        • Stay inside during the storm.                 • Water dripping through the ceiling
        • Fasten doors and windows tightly                indicates that the roof is damaged
          and check that doors to garden                  or that flashing has worked loose,
          sheds and garages are also secure.              allowing water to seep through.
        • Keep   flashlights, candles, and              • Place  buckets under the drips and
          matches in case of power outages.               go into the attic to look for a leak.
        • If a thunderstorm is on the way,              • If a roof tile or slate is damaged or
          disconnect television antennae                  missing, make a temporary repair
          and unplug computers and                        with plastic sheeting (p.206).
          televisions. Power surges from                • If water is coming in around the
          lightning can start fires and cause             chimney stack, repair or replace
          considerable damage.                            flashing after the storm (p.206).
        • Keep some buckets that you can                • If water is pooling outside your
          place under ceiling leaks if the roof           house, use a stiff broom to sweep
          is damaged.                                     it away, preferably downhill.
        • Store garden furniture.                       • If the water continues to rise, block
                              Take inside anything
                                                          all gaps under and around doors
                              that could be damaged       with sandbags (p.228).
                              by the storm

                                                      3 Minimize damage
                                                        • If a window is blown in, move
                                                         valuables out of that room. Block
                                                         the window with boarding, nailing
                                                         it from the inside. Alternatively,
                                                         move a large piece of furniture,
                                                         such as a wardrobe, in front of it.
                                                        • a chimney stack is blown off,
                                                         If
                                                         water may find its way down the
                                                         chimney. Use boards to block all
                                                         fireplaces, preventing rubble from
                                                         coming down into the room.
                                                                                      SEVERE STORM                    227

 BEING OUTSIDE IN LIGHTNING

1 Get to safety
  • If you are out in a lightning storm,
                                                        DO
                                                                     DO’S AND DON’TS

                                                                                      DON’T
    seek shelter in a low area, such as                 • Get to open land.           • Stand on high ground,
    a ditch or hillside, away from tall                 • Stay away from tall             such as on top of a hill.

    trees and poles, and water.
                                                            trees or rocks.           • Think that you are
                                                        •   Get as small and low          protected by wearing
                                                                                          rubber-soled shoes
                                                            you can.
  • Remember     that any thunderstorm                                                    or boots.
    may produce lightning.                              •   Protect your head
                                                            from a possible strike.   •   Kneel or sit down on
  • Stay far away from metal objects,                   •   Stay in your car if           wet material.
    such as fences or pylons, which                         you can.                  •   Carry metal objects.
    pose a particular danger: lightning
    sparks can arc off metal, and
    strike anyone standing nearby.
  • If you are riding a bicycle, get off,
    leave the bicycle, and take shelter.
                                                      2 Protect yourself
                                                        • Do not carry anything with a metal
  • you are riding a horse, get off,
    If                                                    rod, such as an umbrella or golf
    tether the horse safely to whatever                   club, that might conduct lightning.
    is available, then seek shelter.
                                                        • If you feel your hair stand on end,
  • If you are in a car with a metal                      lightning is about to strike.
    roof, stay where you are: the car’s
    metal shell and rubber wheels will                  • you are near trees or rocks, run
                                                          If
                                                          for open ground, if you have time.
    protect you.
                                                          Kneel down, bend forward to
  • If you are out in a boat, head for                    protect your head, and put your
    land immediately.                                     hands on your knees.
                                                                  • It is important to protect
                                                                      your head, the most
                                                                      vulnerable part of the
                                                                      body, and to minimize
                                                                      contact with the ground.

  Keep your head
  lower than the
  rest of your body

! If someone is struck by lightning
  • A bolt of lightning can be fatal if it strikes     • Dial 911 or call EMS immediately, even if the
    someone on the head and then travels down            person appears to be unharmed.
    to the ground. It can also cause severe burns,
                                                       • If the person’s clothing is on fire, follow
    broken bones, cuts, and unconsciousness; and         the instructions on p.182.
    it can set clothing on fire.
                                                       • Treat the burns (pp.48–9).
  • Do not touch someone who has been struck
    by lightning if he or she is very wet or in        • If the person is not breathing, start rescue
    water: you could be electrocuted because             breathing (pp.16–17).
    the electrical discharge is still within his or    • If the person has no signs of circulation, start
    her body.                                            CPR (pp.18–20).
228     NATURAL DISASTERS

         Flood
              For SEVERE STORM see p.226                      For TSUNAMI see p.242
         Heavy rainfall, melting snows, rivers changing course, dams collapsing, and high
         tides in coastal areas can all cause floods. If you live in an area prone to flooding,
         know the difference between a “flood watch” (flooding is possible), a “flood
         warning” (flooding is expected), and a “severe flood warning” (severe flooding
         is expected). Take the necessary measures to protect your family and home.

        PREPARING FOR A FLOOD

      1 Plan
        •
             ahead
             Contact your city/town council to
                                                              2 Prepare
                                                                •
                                                                        home
                                                                    Block all gaps under and around
             find out the height to which a                         external doors with sandbags (see
             flood could rise.                                      box below).
           • alert to flood warnings issued
             Be                                                   • If flood water is expected to rise
             by weather forecasters and the                         up to window height, place
             Environmental Protection Agency.                       sandbags along windowsills too.
           • Keep enough bricks with which                        • Take up your carpets and store
             to raise wooden or upholstered                         them upstairs along with all the
             furniture off the floor and out                        valuables you can move.
             of the flood water.                                  • Fill clean baths, sinks, and plastic
           • Buy sandbags and sand if water is                      bottles with cold water.
             likely to rise above door level.                     • Turn off electricity and gas supplies;
           • Keep your important documents in                       flooded wiring can cause fires.
             plastic wallets in a safe place.                     • Use bricks to raise furniture.

      PROTECTING YOUR HOME WITH SANDBAGS

      • Use sandbags to seal entry points around doors and
        vents. Also seal windows if the water is likely to rise
        that high.
      • Half-fill the sandbag casings with sand. If you run out
        of casings, make your own from plastic shopping
        bags, pillow cases, or even stockings.
      • Place the first row of bags in position, butting them
        up against each other, end to end, and then stomp
        down on them to mould the ends together.
      • Lay the second row on top, staggering the bags, and
        stomping down on them to mould them into the row
        below. This will prevent seepage through gaps.
      • If your wall of sandbags needs to be three or four        Using sandbags
        layers, lay two rows side by side, followed by a second   Lay the second row of bags in place, staggering the
        double row, then one or more single rows on top.          bags over the first row in a brickworklike formation.
                                                                                       FLOOD       229

 SURVIVING A FLOOD

1 Stay inside                                 2 Evacuation
         •       If you can, move               • If you are told to evacuate, follow
                 upstairs, taking with           the instructions carefully.
                 you food, water,               • addition to taking your disaster
                                                 In
                 emergency supplies,             emergency kit (p.225), take all the
                 pets, valuables, and            clothing you can. It may be days or,
                 important papers.               in some situations, weeks before
                                                 you are able to return home.

                       Take plenty
                       of water
                       with you
                                              3 Signal
                                                •
                                                       for help
                                                  If the water has risen to the point
                                                  that you are unable to leave safely
                                                  on foot, or you feel that your life
                                                  is in danger if you stay where you
                            Take small pets
                            upstairs in pet       are, signal for help.
                            carriers
                                                • Lean out of an upstairs window
                                                  or climb onto the roof and call for
                                                  help by shouting and/or waving
                 If your child is                 something bright.
                 upset by the flood,
                 carry her to safety                               • Do not climb
                                                                     onto the roof if it
                                                                     is slippery or if
                                                                      there are high
  • If flood water rises quickly,                                      winds: you may
    leaving you no time to move                                         put yourself in
    your valuables upstairs, put                                        greater danger.
    them on high shelves to
    keep them out of the water.
  • aware that flood water can
    Be
                                                                           Attract attention
    weaken structural                                                      by shouting and
    foundations, causing buildings                                         waving
    to sink, floors to crack and, in
    severe cases, walls to collapse.
    Regularly check for cracks in what
    you can see of your walls, floors,
    doors, staircases, and windows.
                                              !If you are outside
                                                • Be very careful when walking through flood
                                                  water: just 6 in (15 cm) of fast-flowing water
  • Listen to your radio for updated              can unbalance you and cause you to fall.
    local information and follow all
    official instructions.                      • If possible, use a stick to feel the ground
                                                  before you step on it: hazards hidden under
  • Observe outside water levels to see           the water could be highly dangerous.
    how fast the flood is rising.
  • Use  your drinking water supply             • Avoid riverbanks and sand dunes, which
    until you are told that the main              could collapse. Also beware of large waves.
    water is safe to drink.                     • Minimize contact with flood water: it could
                                                  be contaminated with sewage.
230    NATURAL DISASTERS

       Extreme cold
       Heavy snowfall and very low temperatures can produce difficult conditions
       both in the home and outside, especially if cold weather is prolonged. Prepare
       for wintry conditions well in advance by checking in summer or early autumn
       that your house is well-insulated. During a freeze, keep warm, stay safe, indoors
       if you can, and be a good neighbor to the elderly or frail.

       PREPARING FOR EXTREME COLD

      1 Check insulation                          3Take
                                                   •
                                                        precautions
                                                       Buy low-wattage electric heaters
        • Attach self-adhesive foam strips
          around loose-fitting doors and               that you can leave on overnight to
          windows to prevent drafts.                   keep rooms above freezing.
        • Fit draft protectors across the            • you depend on electricity, buy a
                                                       If
          bottoms of external doors.                   portable gas heater to use should
                                                       power lines come down.
        • Hang a heavy curtain at the front
          door to keep the hall draft-free.          • If you have a wood or coal
                                                       fireplace, stock up on fuel
        • improve insulation, secure
          To                                           and matches.
          sheets of glass in frames across
          single glazed windows. Alternatively,      • Maintain   medicine supplies.
          use a special heat-sensitive plastic       • If your stove is electric, stock up
          film as a temporary measure (see             on foods that do not need cooking.
          box right); the film is cheaper, but
          less efficient.
                                                  T E M P O R A RY I N S U L AT I O N
        • Check   that outdoor pipes and
          faucets are properly insulated.                                        Attach lengths
        • Check that the attic, and pipes                                        of tape
          and water tanks within it, are
          well insulated.
                                                                                 Apply adhesive tape
                                                                                 Attach lengths of double-
                                                                                 sided adhesive tape down
                                                                                 the sides and across the

      2Check heating
                                                                                 top and bottom of the
                                                                                 window. Allow adhesive
                                                                                 to harden for 1 hour.
        • Before winter arrives, turn on your
          central heating to check that it               Keep the hairdryer
                                                      moving to smooth film
          works. If you discover problems
          see p.192 for advice.                   Stretch plastic
        • Stick aluminum foil sheets behind       Press heat-sensitive plastic
          radiators to reflect heat back into     film across the window
                                                  and onto the adhesive
          the room. This is particularly          strips. Hold a hairdryer
          important for radiators against         a few inches away and
          external walls.                         warm the plastic until
                                                  the film is quite taut.
                                                                                      EXTREME COLD           231

SURVIVING EXTREME COLD

1 Stay
  •
       warm
    Keep the heating on day and night
                                                        I F Y O U H AV E T O G O O U T

                                                        • Dress warmly in layers of light clothing, a
    at a low setting so that your home                    jacket or coat, hat, scarf, and gloves.
    does not become cold and water                      • Wear sturdy boots with deep
    pipes do not freeze. Alternatively,                   treads. Be careful to take
    use low-wattage electric heaters.                     small, firm steps; point your
  • you are worried about costly fuel
    If                                                    toes inward on downhill
    bills, heat only the rooms that you                   slopes and bend your
    need to use, and close the doors                      knees slightly if the
    to unheated rooms.                                    going is steep.

  • Close   the curtains to keep the heat               • Be careful on icy
    in, but air rooms daily so that they                  surfaces; try to find
    do not become stuffy.                                 something, such as a
                                                          railing, to hold onto.
                                                        • Be particularly careful if
2 Stay
  •
       inside
    When outside conditions are icy,
                                                          you are elderly: brittle
                                                          bones fracture easily.

    do not venture outside unless need
    be. If you must go out, see the box                           Cover your hands
    on the right for sensible advice.                             and head

  • Do not drive unless absolutely                     Preventing heat loss
    necessary. If you will be driving on
                                                       A hat is the most important
    rural or hilly terrain, go prepared                item of clothing, because
    to be caught in a snowdrift or                     most body heat is lost
    blizzard (see below).                              through the head

  • Check   that you have a cold-weather
    kit (see box right) in your car in
    case of emergency.                                                ESSENTIALS
  • Always   take a cellular phone,
                                                       COLD-WEATHER CAR KIT
    whether you are on foot or in a car.
                                                       • Shovel                    • Flashlight, batteries
  • If you live in an avalanche area                   • Blankets and coats        • High-energy food
    and an avalanche warning is issued,                • Gravel or canvas          • Water
    stay inside unless told to evacuate.

!If your car gets stuck in snow
  • Drive very slowly backward and forward,          • If you are unable to move the car, do not
    moving only slightly each time, allowing           try to walk to safety: stay inside the vehicle.
    your car to gradually make a track for itself.
                                                     • Wrap yourself in blankets or newspaper.
  • If this does not work, use a shovel to clear     • Turn on the engine and run the heater for
    away snow from around the wheels, then             10 minutes every hour to conserve gasoline.
    put down gravel or canvas to give the tires
    something to grip. Drive forward very            • Open a window occasionally to let in air.
    slowly. Once the car is clear of the snow,       • Try to stay awake; the risk of hypothermia
    drive until you have reached safety.               (p.54) is greater if you fall asleep.
232    NATURAL DISASTERS

       Wildfire
       Most wildfires, which include bushfires and fires in woods, forests, and prairies,
       occur in hot, dry weather. These fires can spread rapidly, covering vast areas,
       and once they have taken hold, are very difficult to control. Protect your home
       against wildfire by creating a safety zone, take sensible precautions to safeguard
       your family, and know what to do in the event of wildfire.

       PROTECTING AGAINST WILDFIRE

      1 Create a safe zone 2 Be prepared
        •                    •
          Remove all flammable vegetation,            Make sure that gutters and drains
          dead branches, leaves, and twigs,           are clear of debris (p.207).
          and mow grass within 30 ft (9 m)          • Install a garden hose that is long
          of your home (100 ft/30 m if you            enough to reach the full extent of
          live in a pine forest).                     your house and garden.
        • Keep this zone clear to ensure that       • Store  in a handy, safe place tools,
          wildfires will have little to burn          such as brushes and spades, that
          and pass by your house instead.             could be used to beat out fire.
        • Consider felling trees other than         • Plan several escape routes from
          fire-resistant hardwoods, such as           your home by car and by foot.
          oak, beech, or ash, inside the zone.
                                                    • Arrange to stay elsewhere in case
        • Store flammable items, such as old          you have to evacuate the area.
          newspapers, firewood, and wooden
          garden furniture, well outside the        • Keep plenty of fuel in your car so
          safety zone.                                that you can escape quickly in the
                                                      event of an emergency.

       SURVIVING WILDFIRE

      1 Be ready to                              2 Protect your home
        evacuate                                   •  Bring wooden garden furniture
                                                      inside the house, if necessary.
        • If a wildfire appears to be heading
          in your direction, check that your        • Use your garden hose to soak both
          car has ample fuel, then park it            the safety zone and the house.
          facing your main route of escape.         • Close all the windows, doors, and
        • Place your disaster emergency kit           air vents. Draw heavy curtains, pull
          (p.225) in the trunk, then close all        down blinds, and take down any
          the doors and windows and leave             lightweight curtains.
          your key in the ignition.                 • Move flammable furniture into the
        • Assemble your pets and fire tools           center of the house, away from any
          (see Be prepared, above).                   windows and glass doors.
                                                                                                 WILDFIRE   233

3 Get to safety                                      4 Use your car as
  • Keep the radio on and listen for
    updated local information and
                                                           protection
    official instructions.                                 • If you are overtaken by flames
                                                             when in the car, stay inside your
  • If you are told to evacuate, follow                      vehicle. You are safer inside your
    the instructions carefully.
                                                             car than outside in the thick smoke
                • Put on a hat and                           and fierce heat, even with the risk
                  gloves, strong shoes,                      that the fuel tank may explode.
                  and cotton or woolen
                  clothing that covers                     • Explain to any passengers the risks
                  your arms and legs.                        of leaving the car.

                                                     5 Follow official
                                                           instructions
                                                           • Do not return home until you have
                                                             been given the all-clear.
                                   Take a brush
                                   to beat out             • When you are allowed to return
                                   small fires               home, proceed with caution –
                                                             small fires may still be blazing.
                                                           • As a precaution against more fires,
                           Wear gloves to                    resoak your house and the entire
                           protect your hands
                                                             safety zone with water.
                                                           • If your house has been damaged by
                                                             fire, check with the fire department
                                 Wear your                   that it is safe to enter the building.
                                 sturdiest shoes
                                                           • necessary, arrange temporary
                                                             If
  • Take your pets, disaster emergency                       accommodation elsewhere.
    kit, and fire tools with you.                          • If the fire has passed by your house,
  • Choose a planned route that will                         check for any smoke damage that
    take you away from the fire, but                         may call for an insurance claim.
    be alert to changes in the fire’s                        Take photographs, if you can, to
    speed and direction.                                     support future claims.

!If you are outside
 • Try to run diagonally away from the
   fire to get out of its path. Aim for
   an open area; a road, or a river, if
   possible. If the fire comes close, lay
   down, curl into a ball, and cover your
   head, hands, and as much of your
   body as possible with a jacket.
 • If your clothing catches fire, quickly
   smother the flames with a coat and           Emergency action
   then roll around on the ground to            If fire is blocking all your escape routes,
   extinguish them (p.182).                     head for a dip or hollow and roll into a ball.
234    NATURAL DISASTERS

       Hurricane
           For FLOOD see p.228             For TORNADO see p.236
       Hurricanes are extremely violent storms that produce torrential rain and strong
       winds of up to 190 mph (305 km/h). Tornadoes may occur simultaneously or
       in the hurricane’s wake. Flooding may also follow. Many hurricanes can be
       predicted, enabling people to protect their homes and evacuate their families in
       good time. If you live in an area that is prone to hurricanes, make sure that you
       know the difference between a “hurricane watch” (a hurricane is possible within
       36 hours) and a “hurricane warning” (a hurricane is likely within 24 hours).

       PREPARING FOR A HURRICANE

      1 Plan
        •
             ahead
          Install hurricane shutters or buy
                                                   3 Get
                                                     •
                                                         to safety
                                                        If you live in a mobile home, leave
          sheets of plywood and strips of               immediately and head toward a
          wood for boarding windows                     hurricane shelter or open ground.
          (see box below). Nail the frames            • If you live in a house and you are
          in position and prepare the                   advised to evacuate, follow all the
          plywood sheets for installation               instructions carefully.
          when necessary.                             • Avoid  coastal and riverside roads
        • Know    the location of the nearest           on your way to a hurricane shelter:
          hurricane shelter.                            these routes may be flooded.

      2 Take precautions                            BOARDING WINDOWS
        • Keep alert for a “hurricane watch”
          and listen to local radio stations for                                  Predrill screw holes
          updates on the situation.                                               Secure frame
                                                                                  in place
        • a “hurricane watch” turns into
          If
          a “hurricane warning,” make final                                       Make outer frame
          adjustments to your home.                                               Cut strips of wood to fit
                                                                                  around the outside of
        • Choose a safe part of the house                                         the window frame. Predrill
          where family members can gather,                                        with holes 6 in (15 cm)
          ideally in a room in the center of                                      apart. Nail the strips in
          the house (such as a hallway) that                                      place to form a frame.
          does not have windows.                          Screw board in place
        • Close the hurricane shutters or fix                 Align screw holes
          boards in place (see box right).
        • Secure external and garage doors.         Attach cover
                                                    Cut sheets of 1⁄2-in (1-cm)
        • Fill clean baths, sinks, containers,      plywood to fit window
          and plastic bottles with water to         frame. Predrill holes to
          ensure an uncontaminated supply.          align with the frame.
                                                    Screw cover in place.
                                                                                       HURRICANE            235

  DURING A HURRICANE

1 Stay informed                                    3 Stay
                                                     •
                                                          safe
                                                          Be aware that when the eye of
  •   Keep your radio on and listen
      for updated local information and                   the storm passes overhead, it may
      official instructions. You may be                   appear that a hurricane is over.
      asked to turn off utilities or to                   However, winds will start blowing
      evacuate at any point.                              again from the opposite direction
                                                          within the hour; this can often be
    • If you are advised to evacuate,                     the worst part of the storm.
      follow all the instructions carefully.
                                                        • Listen for warnings of tornadoes
                                                          (p.236) or severe flooding (p.228),
                                                          both of which often occur in the
2 Stay
  •
       indoors
      Do not evacuate unless advised                    •
                                                          wake of a hurricane.
                                                          Stay where you are until you are
      to do so, or you feel that it would                 sure that the hurricane has passed.
      endanger life to remain at home.
    • Close  all interior doors and place
      doorstops under them.
    • Close all curtains and blinds.
                                                    !If you are outside
                                                        • Lie flat on the ground and crawl on your
    • Turn off major appliances if                        stomach to shelter, such as an outcrop of
      advised to do so, or if power fails.                rock, a ditch, or a low wall.

    • Make   sure that all household pets               • Cover your head with your hands or a coat.
      are inside and keep them in pet                   • Do not take shelter close to trees because
      carriers with adequate water.                       branches may break off or trees may even
                                                          be uprooted, and fall on top of you.
    • Go  to your chosen safe place and
      stay under a table, if there is one.              • During the eye of the storm, move to the
                                                          other side of your shelter, since the wind will
    • If you feel that the house is starting              now come from the opposite direction.
      to collapse around you, try to move
      quickly under a sturdy bed or a                   • After the winds die down, wait for at least
      pile of mattresses; if there is no                  11/2 hours before leaving your shelter.
      time to move, stay under the table.

HELPING CHILDREN COPE
Children may find a hurricane
                                  • Take playthings, such as cards,
terrifying, especially if their     into the safe room or hurricane
home and belongings are             shelter to keep children busy.
damaged or an evacuation is
necessary. To help them feel      • Write each child’s name,
                                    address, and contact number
more secure, try the following.
                                    on a piece of paper and
• Explain that a hurricane is a     place it in the child’s pocket.
  very bad storm and that the
  family might need to go to
  a safer building.               Comforting children
                                  Reassure young children and calm
• Ask children to help you        their fears by holding them and
  with simple tasks.              giving them plenty of attention.
236    NATURAL DISASTERS

       Tornado
           For SEVERE STORM see p.226              For HURRICANE see p.234
       Tornadoes, tall columns of spinning air moving at high speeds, can cause
       immense damage. Tornadoes usually occur in warm, humid, unsettled weather,
       but they can develop anywhere at any time, particularly after a thunderstorm
       or hurricane. If you live in a tornado area, make sure that you are familiar with
       the early warning system: a “tornado watch” indicates that a tornado is possible;
       and a “tornado warning” that a tornado has been seen and could be heading in
       your direction. Depending on the severity and path of the tornado, either stay
       under shelter or evacuate your home.

       PREPARING FOR A TORNADO

      1 Take precautions                           3 Get to safety
        • Keep alert for a “tornado watch”           • If you are told to evacuate, follow
          and listen to local radio stations           the instructions carefully.
          for updates.                               • Act promptly, but calmly. You may
        • Close   hurricane shutters or board          have only a short time to get to
          your windows (p.234) to protect              the nearest hurricane shelter.
          yourself from flying glass (but see
          point 2 below).
                                                     S I G N S A N D WA R N I N G S
        • Choose a safe part of your house
          where family members can gather
          if a tornado is on the way (p.234,
                                                     • Certain changes in weather conditions, such
                                                       as blowing debris or a sudden wind drop and
          Take precautions).                           unusually still air, may herald a tornado.
        • Fill clean baths, sinks, containers,       • In some circumstances, a low rumbling
          and plastic bottles with water to            noise, the sound of an approaching tornado,
          ensure an uncontaminated supply.             may be audible.
        • Fill your vehicle’s tank with fuel.        • Tornadoes can be seen approaching, often
                                                       from a great distance, moving at speeds of
                                                       up to 30–40 mph (50–60 km/h).

      2 Listen
        •
               for warning
           If a “tornado watch” turns into a
                                                     • A tall funnel shape
                                                       of whirling air and
                                                       dust will descend
           “tornado warning,” be prepared              from underneath
           to evacuate your home. If you are           a storm cloud.
           in a car, van, or mobile home, get
           out (see Stay safe, p.237).
         • If warnings predict that your home
           will be in the tornado’s direct path,     Violent tornado
           open doors, shutters, and windows         The characteristic
           on the side away from the storm to        twisting funnel of air
           prevent a buildup of air pressure.        and dust indicates an
                                                     approaching tornado.
                                                                                                  TORNADO      237

 DURING A TORNADO

1 Stay
  •
       safe
    If a“tornado watch” turns into a
                                                        2 Stay
                                                          •
                                                               informed
                                                                  Listen to your radio for updated
    “tornado warning” but you are                                 local information and official
    advised not to evacuate, go to your                           instructions. You may be asked
    chosen safe place in your house.                              to turn off utilities or evacuate
  • Protect yourself and your family by                           if the tornado alters course.
    crawling under a heavy piece of                             • If you are advised to evacuate,
    furniture, such as a table or desk.                           follow all instructions carefully.
  • you are unable to hide under
    If
    furniture, sit down in the center
    of the room and protect your head
    with your arms.
                                                        3 Return home
                                                                • Once the tornado has passed, wait
  • If you are in a car, van, or mobile                           at least 5 minutes before leaving
    home, get out at once and head                                your place of shelter.
    for open ground. Lie down flat
    and cover your
    head. Vehicles can
    be picked up by a
    forceful tornado and
    then dropped again,
    so they are not safe
    places for shelter.

     Choose a sturdy piece of
     furniture as your shelter

               Take your radio
               with you to
               stay informed

! If you are outside
  • Find the nearest sturdy building and head for           • If you are in a car, do not try to outdrive a
    the basement or lay down on the ground floor.               tornado: if it changes course you will be in
                                                                danger of being picked up in your vehicle.
  • If you are close to a bridge, get underneath it.
  • If there is no obvious shelter, lie flat on the         • Get out of the car immediately and either
    ground, away from trees or structures that                  find shelter or lie in a ditch or other
    could collapse, and ideally in a ditch. Cover               low-lying land with your hands
    your head with your hands.                                  over your head.

  • Be aware of the dangers of flying objects,
    falling trees, buildings that may collapse,
    and damaged power lines.

  Protecting yourself
  If you are unable to locate a shelter, find   Protect your
  a low-lying area and lie down, taking         head from
  care to protect your head.                    flying debris
238      NATURAL DISASTERS

         Earthquake
               For WILDFIRE see p.232                          For TSUNAMI see p.242
         Earthquakes may strike along fault lines without warning, causing deaths and
         major damage. Often quakes last for only seconds, but in that time, they can
         destroy buildings and roads, and crush people. Fires resulting from broken
         gas pipes can rage for days afterward, and aftershocks are a further danger.
         If you live in an earthquake area, prepare your home as best you can.

         PREPARING FOR AN EARTHQUAKE

      1 Identify potential 2 Identify safe
            hazards                                                   places
            • Check structural elements in your                       • In every room, identify safe spots
              home (see p.222) to ensure that                           where you could take shelter. Ideal
              they are sound and see that heavy                         places are under sturdy desks,
              furniture is secure (see box below).                      tables or strong internal doorway
            • Place large, heavy objects on lower                       wells away from windows, or
              shelves and rehang heavy mirrors                          places where glass could shatter.
              or pictures that are currently                          • Identify at least one safe outdoor
              positioned over seating or beds.                          location that you could escape to
            • Store fragile items in low cabinets                       if necessary. Try to find a spot that
              that are fitted with latches or locks.                    is out in the open, well away from
                                                                        buildings, trees, power lines, and
                                                                        elevated roads and bridges, all of
                                                                        which are dangerous because they
      SECURING FURNITURE                                                could fall or collapse.

                                     Screw the bracket
                                                                      • Make sure that every member of
                                     into the wall and
                                                                        your family knows what to do in
                                     the bookcase                       the event of an earthquake (p.239).

                                     Attach furniture
                                     Attach exterior angle
                                     brackets at the top or
                                     sides of tall furniture
                                                                   3 Be ready
                                     like bookcases and
                                                                      • Be alert for small tremors, known
                                     wardrobes                          as foreshocks. These indicate that
                                                                        a larger earthquake is on its way.
                                                                        If you do feel a foreshock, warn
            Attach steel straps                                         family members and head for a
         at top and bottom of
           the boiler to secure
                                                                        safe location at once.
                 it to the wall                                       • Be prepared to experience a ripple
      Secure boiler                                                     of aftershocks following the main
      Use galvanized steel straps,                                      earthquake. These aftershocks
      with holes punched                                                can also be severe and may cause
      through them, to attach                                           additional damage.
      a boiler to the wall
                                                                                 EARTHQUAKE                239

 DURING AN EARTHQUAKE
                                                            DO’S AND DON’TS
1 Take cover
  • If you feel the ground shake, drop
                                               DO                            DON’T
   under a heavy desk or table, press          • Keep away from              • Use stairs or elevators.
   your face against your arm to
                                                   windows: they could
                                                   be shattered.
                                                                             • Run into the street:
                                                                                 falling bricks or glass
   protect your eyes, and hold on.             •   Take cover wherever           could injure you.
  • you cannot reach a table, take
   If                                              you are.                  •   Think that you are
   shelter in an internal doorway.             •   Stay away from items          safe once the ground
                                                   that might fall on you,       stops shaking: always
                                                   such as tall furniture.       expect aftershocks.
                                               •   Put out cigarettes in     •   Use telephones unless
                                                   case of gas leaks.            the call is essential.

                                             3 Stay safe
                         Brace yourself        • If you are outside, do not go back
                         against a support       into your home until it has been
                                                 checked for structural safety.
                                               • you are inside and your home
                                                 If
                                                 seems to be structurally sound, wait
                         Cover your eyes         there until you are given the official
                         with your arm           all-clear. Then, prepare to leave.
                                                 Stay elsewhere until your home has
  • If you cannot move quickly to a              been checked by a professional.
    safe place, stay where you are but         • Check everyone for injuries and
    keep well away from windows.                 give first-aid treatment as necessary.
  • you are in bed, stay there and
    If
                                               • water pipes are damaged, turn off
                                                 If
    protect your head with a pillow.             your supply at the main.
  • Stay exactly where you are until           • If you can smell gas or suspect that
    the shaking stops.                           electrical wiring is damaged, turn
                                                 off supplies at the main.
                                               • Keep listening to your radio for
2 Expect aftershocks                             official instructions.
 • Put out candles or naked flames in
   case of gas leaks. If you smell gas,

 •
   turn off the supply at the main.
   Each  time you feel an aftershock,
   take cover and hold on, as before.
                                             ! If you are outside
                                               • Lie down as far away as possible from
                                                   buildings, trees, and power lines, or seek
 • Be aware that aftershocks can                   shelter in a doorway. Stay where you are
   topple structures already weakened              until the shaking stops.
   by earthquakes. Inspect your home
   for damage after each aftershock,           • Do not go into any form of underground
                                                   shelter, such as a cellar or tunnel, because
   and move everyone out of the
                                                   it could collapse.
   building quickly if you suspect
   that it is unsafe.                          • If you are driving, stop your car carefully and
                                                   stay in your car until the shaking stops.
240    NATURAL DISASTERS

       Volcanic eruption
           For EARTHQUAKE see p.238                  For TSUNAMI see p.242
       Often with little or no warning, volcanoes erupt, sending molten lava and mud
       flowing down the sides, clouds of ash billowing into the sky, and rock fragments
       hurtling down to earth. You increase your chances of escaping unharmed if you
       leave the area as soon as you are advised to do so.

       ESCAPING A VOLCANIC ERUPTION

      1 Be
        •
           prepared
          If you live anywhere near a
                                                     2 Evacuate
                                                       •  If a volcano erupts without advance
          volcano, whether it is dormant or               warning, you may be advised to
          active, keep a pair of goggles and              evacuate the area, in which case
                            a disposable dust             you should leave immediately.
                            mask for each                 Make sure that you follow all
                            family member.                evacuation instructions carefully.
                          • Make   sure that            • Put on goggles and a disposable
                            you have planned              dust mask. If you do not have a
                            at least two routes           mask, then improvise by wrapping
                            out of the area,              either a wet scarf or handkerchief
                            and arranged a                around your face.
                            place to meet               • avoid skin irritation caused
                                                          To
            VOLCANO         family members.               by ashfall, put on clothing that
                                                          covers your entire body.

      !Warning signs
        Professional vulcanologists study
                                                        Goggles protect the
                                                        eyes; make sure they
        grumbling volcanos for indications of           fit snugly
        activity. The following are all warning
        signs that a volcano is active and about        Wear a mask to
        to erupt:                                       protect against
                                                        poisonous gases
        • An increase in seismic activity, ranging      and dust
          from minor tremors to earthquakes.
        • Rumbling noises coming from
          the volcano.
        • A cloud of steam hanging over the
          top of the volcano.
        • A smell of sulfur from local rivers.          • Avoid areas that are downwind of
                                                          the volcano because burning hot
        • Falls of acidic rain.                           ash and clouds of gases may be
        • Fine dust suspended in the sky.                 blown in your direction.
        • Occasional bursts of hot gases or             • Avoid river valleys and low-lying
          ash from the volcano top.
                                                          areas, where mudflows may occur.
                                                                             VOLCANIC ERUPTION                  241

  DURING A VOLCANIC ERUPTION

1 Follow instructions ! If you are outside
  •   If a volcano erupts while you are                  • Try to get inside a building.
      at home, make sure that all family                 • If you are caught in a rock fall, roll into a ball
      members and household pets are                       to protect your head.
      accounted for, and close all your
      doors, windows, and vents.                         • If you suspect that you are in the path of a
                                                           nuée ardente (see box below), you can
    • If you are not advised to evacuate,                  survive only by finding shelter underground
      stay inside.                                         or submerging yourself in water. The danger
    • Listen to your radio for official                    usually passes in just 30 seconds.
      instructions. A period of calm may                 • If you are caught near a stream, beware of
      follow an eruption. Be prepared                      mudflows (see box below). Do not cross a
      because you may be told to leave                     bridge if a mudflow is moving beneath it
      then to escape further eruptions.                    because the bridge could be swept away.

2 Beware of ashfall 3 Stay safe
  •                   •
      If you have breathing problems,                      If you were evacuated, stay out of
      such as asthma, stay inside.                         any restricted areas until you are
    • Press damp towels firmly around                      given the official all-clear.
      doors and windows, and any other                   • Be aware that mudflows, ashfall,
      draft sources.                                       flash floods, and wildfires can reach
    • Avoid driving: heavy ashfall clogs                   you even if you are far from the
      engines, often causing cars to stall.                volcano and are unable to see it.
    • Clear volcanic ash from the roof                   • When    you return home, or if you
      of your house: its weight can cause                  never left, dampen and clean up
      buildings to collapse. Be careful                    ash that has settled around the
      when working on the roof, and                        house, being careful not to wash it
      put on protective clothing, goggles,                 into drains. Put on your protective
      and a dust mask before going out.                    clothing, goggles, and a dust mask.

U N D E R S TA N D I N G T H E D A N G E R S

• Ash and other debris rain        • Lava flows are fairly unlikely to
  down from the sky, covering        kill you because they move
  buildings, land, and people.       slowly, but anything that
• Debris flows are a mixture of      stands in their path will be
  water and volcanic debris that     burned, crushed, or buried.
                                                                                RED-HOT LAVA FLOW
  flows down the volcano sides.    • Pyroclastic surges are mixtures
  They can travel long distances     of rock fragments and hot           • Nuées ardentes are rapidly
  and destroy whole villages.        gases that move rapidly across        moving, red-hot clouds of ash,
• Mudflows are fast-moving           land like hurricanes. Anyone          gas, and rock fragments that
  rivers of mud that flow from       caught in their paths is likely       flow down the side of a
  volcanoes down river valleys       to be burned, asphyxiated,            volcano at speeds of over
  and over low-lying areas.          or crushed.                           100 mph (160 km/h).
242     NATURAL DISASTERS

        Tsunami
             For FLOOD see p.228                  For EARTHQUAKE see p.238
        An earthquake, volcanic eruption, or underwater landslide can cause a tsunami: a
        series of underwater waves that sweep towards shore, sometimes rising to heights
        of over 100 ft (30 m), and causing immense damage. A “tsunami advisory”
        indicates that a tsunami is possible; a “tsunami watch” that a tsunami may
        be 2 hours away; and a “tsunami warning” that giant waves may be imminent.
        If you live within 2 miles (3.2 km) of the shore and your house stands less than
        100 ft (30 m) above sea level, evacuate as soon as you receive a “tsunami
        warning” and move to high ground as far inland as you can go.

        PREPARING FOR A TSUNAMI

      1 Be aware                                          2 Take precautions
        •   Keep alert for a “tsunami advisory”                • Keep your car filled with fuel so
            or “tsunami watch,” and listen to                    that you can drive to safety at a
            local radio stations for updates.                    moment’s notice.
          • Check   that your planned escape                   • a “tsunami watch” turns into
                                                                 If
            route is clear.                                      a “tsunami warning,” prepare to
          • Familiarize yourself with warning                    evacuate your home.
            signs, such as a sudden change in                  • Coastal areas within 1 mile (1.6 km)
            the level of coastal waters.                         of the sea and less than 25 ft
          • Tsunamis   often cause severe floods;                (7.5 m) above sea level are most at
            make sure that you are prepared                      risk; make an early assessment of
            to cope (p.228).                                     the best route to higher ground.

      U N D E R S TA N D I N G T S U N A M I S

      • Earthquakes, underwater         • Seismic activity may be the
        landslides, or volcanic           only advance warning of an
        eruptions can cause tsunamis.     approaching tsunami.
      • Each tsunami consists of a      • As the tsunami nears the
        series of waves travelling at     coast, the waves slow down
        speeds of up to 600 mph           and increase in height.
        (970 km/h).                     • Before the first wave reaches
      • These waves are hundreds of       the shore, the sea may be
        miles (kilometers) long but       dramatically “sucked” away
        only a few feet (about a          from the shoreline.
        meter) “tall” as they travel    • Successive waves appear at
        the ocean floor. Hence, they      intervals of 5 to 90 minutes.
        cannot be detected from the     • The first wave is usually not     Sea-borne disaster
        air or at sea until they near     the largest; the following ones   Vast sea waves crash onto the shore,
        the shore.                        cause the most damage.            causing damage and claiming lives.
                                                                                        TSUNAMI              243

 DURING A TSUNAMI

1 Get to safety
  • If you are advised to evacuate,
                                             !Ifearthquake
                                                  you feel an
                                                            on the coast
    follow all instructions carefully
    and leave as quickly as possible.          • Drop to the ground, crawl to a sturdy shelter,
                                                 if possible, and put your hands over your
  • Go to your planned evacuation                head to protect it.
    place or follow instructions for a         • When the shaking stops, gather your family
    recommended evacuation route, if             and evacuate. Move inland and to higher
    issued. Your place of safety should          ground as quickly as possible: a tsunami may
    be at least 100 ft (30 m) above sea          be only minutes away.
    level or 2 miles (3.2 km) inland.
                                               • Stay away from any structures that may have
                                                 been weakened by the earthquake.

2 Stay informed                                • Do not leave your place of safety until an
                                                 official all-clear has been issued.
  • Keep listening to your radio for
    updated local information and
    official instructions.
  • Stay inland and on high ground
    until the official all-clear is given.
                                             4 Stay safe
                                               • Do not use tap water unless you
                   • Be aware that a             have been officially advised that
                    tsunami is not just          it is safe to do so.
                     one wave, but a
                      series of waves, so
                                               • Open    doors and windows to help
                                                 the building dry out.
                      the risk of danger
                       may continue for        • Inspect all your food and drink
                       hours. People who         supplies and throw away wet items.
                       return to their         • If you smell gas, turn off the supply
                          homes after            at the main, open your doors and
                           the first wave        windows, and leave at once.
                           (often not          • If electrical wiring has become wet
                           the biggest)          or damaged, turn off the electricity
                           risk drowning.        supply at the main.

3 Check
  •
        damage
    When you are allowed to return to          DO
                                                            DO’S AND DON’TS

                                                                             DON’T
    your home, inspect the structure of        • Go as far inland and        • Try to watch the giant
    the building carefully for cracks or           as high as you can to         waves come ashore.
    weaknesses. Tsunami waters often
                                                   escape the water.         • Leave your place of
    damage foundations and walls.              •   Be careful returning          safety after the first
                                                   home: the tsunami             wave: wait for the
  • Enter cautiously because there may             may have caused               official all-clear before
    be hazards hidden under the water.             structural damage.            returning home.
                                               •   Use bottled water         •   Enter your home with
  • Check for potential fire hazards,              until you are told that       a naked flame: there
    such as broken gas pipes or flooded            tap water is safe.            may be a gas leak.
    electrical circuits.
244   NATURAL DISASTERS

      Post-disaster survival
      Once a severe natural disaster is over, life may not return to normal for some
      time; in the case of an earthquake or volcanic eruption, it may be weeks before
      normal life resumes. In the meantime, keep out of danger, find temporary shelter,
      if necessary, and conserve food and water supplies. Check your home for damage,
      and find temporary accommodation if you suspect that it may be unsound.

                                  ACTION PLAN

                                                                     ACTION
               Are you in              Are any family
  START       your home?                                        GIVE APPROPRIATE
                                         members                FIRST AID (pp.8–63)
                                          injured?              AND SEEK MEDICAL
                                                                HELP IF NEEDED.
                   Yes
                                             Yes

                    No
                                                                  Is the family
                                             No
                                                                    together?

                ACTION
                                                                        Yes
           IF YOU EVACUATED,
           WAIT UNTIL THE
           ALL-CLEAR BEFORE             Might your
           RETURNING HOME.              home have                        No
                                      been damaged?

               Is it safe to                 No
              turn on main                                           ACTION
                 supplies                                       TRY TO CONTACT
                 (p.248)?                    Yes                MISSING MEMBERS
                                                                OF THE FAMILY. MAKE
                                                                ARRANGEMENTS FOR
                   Yes                                          FAMILY MEMBERS
                                                                UNABLE TO RETURN
                                          ACTION
                                                                HOME (p.245).
                                      CHECK FOR DAMAGE
                    No
                                      (p.248).

                                                                    ACTION
                ACTION
                                                                WAIT UNTIL THE
            TURN ON WATER AND                                   SITUATION HAS
            ELECTRICITY AND GET                                 IMPROVED OR SEEK
            YOUR GAS PROVIDER                                   ADVICE FROM YOUR
            TO TURN ON THE GAS.                                 SERVICE PROVIDERS.
                                                                     POST-DISASTER SURVIVAL              245

  IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH

1 Assess situation                                    3 Make contact
    • If the disaster was severe but you                •  If you have been separated from
      remained in your home, you will                      family members who were unable
      usually be advised to stay there                     to find shelter in the house with
      unless you think that the building                   you, you will want to make
      is structurally unsound.                             contact as soon as possible.
    • You are generally safer in your                    • Try to get in touch by cellular
      home, away from external dangers.                    phone or call the friend or relative
      By staying inside, you will not                      at the second emergency meeting
      obstruct the emergency services.                     place in your disaster plan (p.223).
    • Check your home for minor                          • Keep calls to a minimum to avoid
      damage, some of which you may                        blocking lines badly needed by the
      be able to repair, and for the safety                emergency services.
      of main supplies (p.248).                          • If you can move around safely in
    • Listen  to your radio or watch                       the local area, visit neighbors,
      television (if you have electricity)                 especially the elderly or disabled,
      to assess the scale of the disaster                  to see if they need help or supplies.
      and its aftermath.                                 • you were not at home when
                                                           If
    • If the incident had minor or no                      the disaster struck, contact family
      effects on your home and family,                     members as soon as possible to
      resume your normal daily activities,                 reassure them that you are safe.
      but be aware that nearby areas
      may have been more seriously
      affected and could be dangerous.
                                                      4 Try to reach help
2 Treat injuries                                        • If you or your family were not at
                                                           home and now cannot get home,
                                                           to your second meeting place,
    • If any members of the family have
      been injured during the disaster,                    or to an evacuation shelter, you
      give them appropriate first-aid                      may have to survive outside until
      treatment (pp.8–63). Always seek                     help arrives. (See pp.246–7 for
      medical help if injuries are severe.                 advice on surviving outside.)

D E A L I N G W I T H S T R A N D E D FA M I LY M E M B E R S

• If the disaster has caused local damage, such as    • If you cannot make contact with your stranded
  roads blocked by fallen trees or flooding, school     children for any reason, ask the emergency
  children may not be able to return home that          services for help.
  evening. Ask a friend to collect them and keep
                                                      • Family members working outside the immediate
  them for the night.                                   area may also be stranded and unable to return
• If the situation is severe, you may need to make      home. They will need to make alternative
  arrangements for your children for a few days         accommodation arrangements until the
  until travel is possible.                             situation improves.
246     NATURAL DISASTERS

        SURVIVING OUTSIDE

      1 Avoid
        •
              danger
             Any post-disaster area will be full
                                                      !Heat exposure
                                                        • Prolonged exposure to strong sunlight
             of potential hazards, so stay alert          can lead to sunburn (p.50), heat
             and move around carefully.                   exhaustion (p.51), heatstroke (p.52),
           • Keep well away from damaged                  and resulting illness.
             power lines: high-voltage electricity      • Move the victim of any of these
             is very dangerous and can cause              conditions to a cool place.
             electrocution and fire.
                                                        • Cool sunburned skin with cold water
           • Leaking   gas pipes are also a danger.       and give the person cold drinks to sip.
             If you smell gas, you should leave
             the area immediately.
                                                        • Symptoms of heat exhaustion are
                                                          headache, dizziness, nausea, and rapid
           • sewage pipes are damaged, there
             If                                           pulse. Give the person an isotonic drink
             is the risk that raw sewage could            or a weak salt and sugar solution (p.51).
             spill out in the open, leading to the
             rapid spread of disease.
                                                        • Symptoms of heatstroke are headache,
                                                          dizziness, flushed skin, and, in serious
           • Buildings that are unstable due to           cases, unconsciousness. Remove the
             a natural disaster could topple at           victim’s outer clothing, lay him or her
             any time. Keep away from tall                down, then cool the skin by repeatedly
             buildings and structures.                    sponging cold water over it.

 !Cold exposure
      • If the weather is very cold and you cannot    2 Find shelter
        find shelter, you are at risk of developing     • If you had to evacuate your home
        frostbite (p.55) and/or hypothermia (p.54).       but did not manage to reach either
      • Symptoms of frostbite include “pins-and-          your chosen place of evacuation or
        needles,” followed by numbness. Skin may          a local emergency shelter, you will
        be white, mottled and blue, or black.             need to find some form of shelter
      • Symptoms of hypothermia include very              for your family.
        cold skin, shivering, apathy, poor vision,      • you are in a town, try to find
                                                          If
        and irritable behavior.                           an empty building to take shelter
      • For either condition, put the victim in a         in. Avoid buildings that look as
        sleeping bag or wrap her in a survival            though they may be structurally
        blanket (covering the head too).                  unsound, especially following
        Frostbitten fingers may be tucked                 an earthquake.
        under the armpits for extra warmth.
                                                        • If you are in the countryside, look
        Give warm, sweet drinks.                          for a manmade structure, such as
                                                          a bridge, barn or shed. As a last
                                                          resort, trees will at least protect
      Keeping warm                                        you from extremes of temperature,
      Wrap the victim in a                                wind, rain, or snow.
      survival blanket, and
      cover her head if she is                          • Use the bedding supplies in your
      not wearing a hat.                                  disaster emergency kit (p.225) to
                                                          keep warm at night.
                                                             POST-DISASTER SURVIVAL          247

3 Create shelter                               5 Build
                                                 •
                                                       fire
  • If you cannot find shelter, try to             If it is cold, build a fire. If you are
    build something with materials                 in the countryside, use twigs and
    you have or find.                              small branches, but be aware of
  • You   need to build a structure that           the dangers of starting a wildfire.
    will provide adequate protection               If you are in a town, use whatever
    from the wind, rain, and sun.                  materials are available.
  • you are in the countryside, you
    If                                           • If you have suitable containers
    could use vegetation and branches              with you, you may be able to heat
    to construct a lean-to shelter.                                   up some of your
                                                                       emergency food.
  • you are in a town, hunt
    If
    around for sheets of metal,
    plastic sheeting, pieces of wood,
    or anything else that could be
    used to create a shelter.
  • Involve all family members in
    constructing the shelter. Not only
    will the work be done more quickly,
    but it will keep you all occupied.

                                               6 Conserve food
                                                 and water
                                                 • If you are unable to reach safety
                                                   or help fails to arrive within 2
                                                   days, think about conserving your
                                                   supplies of food and water.
  Make a roof out of      Find something         • Restrict adult rations but give
  vegetation strapped     water-resistant to       children, the elderly, and pregnant
  to a wooden frame       use as a floor
                                                   women normal supplies, if possible.
                                                 • Be aware that water is more vital
4 Keep positive                                    than food: a healthy adult can
                                                   survive without food for a week
                                                   with no serious health effects, but
  • Unpack your disaster emergency
    kit and find places for everyone               more than 1–2 days without water
    to spread out their sleeping bags.             can be highly dangerous.
    Make your shelter as comfortable             • If water supplies run low, collect
    as possible.                                   rainfall to drink.
  • Comfort young children by telling            • Alternatively, find the cleanest-
    them how exciting your “camping”               looking source you can and purify
    experience will be.                            water to make it drinkable (p.249).
  • Try to keep up morale with the               • Do not drink water from streams
    thought that you are all safe and              or damaged pipes: it could be
    that this is only a temporary                  contaminated and could seriously
    situation until help arrives.                  damage your health.
248    NATURAL DISASTERS

      CHECKING YOUR HOME

      1 Check
        •
              for damage 3 Make repairs
                           •
          Do not enter your home if there is         Check for minor damage, such as
          water around it. Flood water can           cracked or missing roof tiles and
          undermine foundations, causing             leaks, in your home. Remedy any
          buildings to sink, floors to crack,        problems as quickly as possible.
          or walls to collapse.                      If necessary, use short-term
        • Check the outside of your home             solutions until proper repair
          for signs of structural damage,            work can be undertaken.
          such as cracks in walls, a leaning        • your home has been shaken by
                                                     If
          chimney, and walls at angles.              the disaster, causing breaks and
        • If you are certain that it is safe to      spills, clean up dangerous debris as
          enter your home, go inside and             quickly as possible. Shattered glass
          inspect the walls, floors, windows,        and spilled flammable liquids and
          doors, and staircases for damage.          bleaches are potentially dangerous.
        • Do  not enter your home carrying
          any naked flame, such as a lighted
          cigarette, in case of gas leaks.                                   Clear up any
                                                                             breaks and spills
        • you are unsure, ask a structural
          If
          engineer to inspect your home.

      2 Check safety of
        main supplies
        • If you remained in your house and
          did not turn off main supplies, be
          aware of the possible dangers.
        • If wiring has been damaged, turn
          off electricity at the main and ask     4 Contact your
          an electrician to inspect it.             insurance company
        • you can smell gas, turn off the
          If                                        • Call your insurance company’s
          supply at the main, open doors              emergency helpline as soon as
          and windows, and leave at once.             possible. You will be given advice
        • sewage pipes are damaged, turn
          If                                          on what to do.
          off your water supply at the main         • immediate repairs are necessary,
                                                      If
          shutoff valve (outside your house)          arrange for them to be carried out
          to prevent contaminated water               straight away. Keep the receipts
          from entering your water system.            to give to your insurers later.
        • Do not drink tap water unless you         • Your insurance company will send
          have been officially told it is safe.       a loss adjuster to assess extensive
        • you turned off main supplies
          If                                          damage and the cost of reparation.
          before the disaster, and are certain      • Take photographs or videos of the
          that they are safe, turn on the             damage to corroborate insurance
          water and electricity, and ask your         claims. Keep copies of all your
          gas supplier to turn on the gas.            correspondence with insurers.
                                                                       POST-DISASTER SURVIVAL                249

  LOOKING AFTER YOUR FAMILY

1 Cope with                                            3 Keep up morale
     power loss                                          •  The aftermath of a major natural
                                                            disaster will be a difficult period.
     • You may have to cope without                         Family members or friends may be
       supplies of gas and electricity for                  unaccounted for, you may have to
       a period of time, particularly if the                cope with injuries, and there will
       disaster has been serious enough                     almost certainly be damage and
       to affect the local infrastructure.                  suffering all around.
     • Use flashlights or candles at night,               • Help your family remain positive
       but conserve supplies by using                       and keep them focused on the issue
       them only if absolutely necessary.                   of survival. Keep busy and try to
     • If you have a working hearth and                     work together as a team, making
       chimney, forage for wood to burn,                    sure that you discuss all plans.
       but be aware of the danger of                      • Reassure young children that you
       chimney fires in a dirty chimney.                    have survived and that the worst
                                                            is over. Keep them entertained to
                                                            distract them.
2 Use food sensibly                                       • Bear in mind the comfort factor of
                                                            food. In a time of great stress and
     • Without electricity to power
       refrigerators and freezers, chilled or               upheaval, a familiar food or drink
       frozen foods will become inedible.                   can be very reassuring.
     • order to conserve the cold air
       In
       inside, avoid opening fridge and
       freezer doors.
     • fully stocked, well-insulated
       A
       freezer should keep foods frozen
       for at least 3 days, so use supplies
       from the fridge first. Only foods
       that do not require cooking will
       be usable, unless you have a
       camping stove.
     • Once you have finished
       these supplies, eat canned
       and dried foods.

P U R I F Y I N G WAT E R
If water supplies run low and main water is            • To disinfect water, use regular household bleach
contaminated, you will have to purify water.             containing 5.25 percent sodium hypochlorite
• If you can see particles floating in water, strain     only. A stronger percentage is dangerous.
  it through some paper towels then boil it, add       • Add two drops of bleach to 1 pt (500 ml) of
  purifying tablets, or disinfect it.                    water, stir and leave it to stand for 30 minutes.
• Boil some water for 10 minutes to purify it, then      The water should smell slightly of bleach. If it
  allow it to cool before drinking.                      does not, repeat the process and leave the
• Use chlorine-based tablets to purify water.            water to stand for 15 minutes more.
250   USEFUL ONLINE SITES AND ADDRESSES

       Useful online sites and addresses
       FIRST-AID                     GENERAL HEALTHCARE             Family Health International
       ORGANIZATIONS                                                P.O. Box 13950
                                     Agency for Healthcare
                                                                    Research Triangle Park
       American First Aid            Research and Quality
                                                                    NC 27709
       4306 State Route 51 South     2101 E. Jefferson St.,
                                                                    Tel: (919) 544-7040
       Belle Vernon, PA 15012        Suite 501
                                                                    Online: www.fhi.org
       Tel: (800) 831-9623           Rockville, MD 20852
       Online: www.amfirstaid.com    Tel: (301) 594-1364
                                                                    HealthNet Canada
                                     Online: www.ahcpr.gov
                                                                    4271 - 99 Fourth Avenue
       American Red Cross
                                                                    Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B3
       P.O. Box 37243                American Alliance              Canada
       Washington, DC 20013.         for Health, Physical           Tel: (613) 220-0623
       Tel: (800) 435-7669           Education, Recreation,         Online: www.healthnet.ca
       Online: www.redcross.org      and Dance
                                     1900 Association Dr.           National Institute on Aging
       National Safety               Reston, VA 20191-1598          Building 31, Room 5C27
       Organization                  Tel: 1-800-213-7193            31 Center Drive, MSC 2292
       1121 Spring Lake Drive        Online: www.aahperd.org        Bethesda, MD 20892
       Itasca, IL 60143-3201
                                                                    Tel: (301) 496-1752
       Tel: (630) 285-1121           American Health                Online: www.nia.nih.gov
       Online: www.nsc.org           Care Association
                                     1201 L St., N.W.               The Emergency Medicine and
       DIY HELP                      Washington, DC 20005           Primary Care Home Page
       AmeriSpec:                    Tel: (202) 842-4444            Online: www.embbs.com
       Home Inspection Service       Online: www.ahca.org
       The ServiceMaster Company                                    MASTER TRADESMEN
       One ServiceMaster Way         American Institute
                                     of Homeopathy                  Lockmasters, Inc.
       Downers Grove, IL 60515
                                     801 N. Fairfax Street,         5085 Danville Rd.
       Tel: (800) WE-SERVE
                                     Suite 306                      Nicholasville, KY 40356-9531
       Online: www.amerispec.com
                                     Alexandria, VA 22314           Tel: (800) 654-0637
                                     Tel: (888) 445-9988            Online: www.lockmasters.com
       Arctic Council - Emergency
       Prevention, Preparedness,     Online: http://www.
                                     homeopathyusa.org              Master Builders Association
       and Response
                                                                    2155 112th Ave NE
       Suite 301, 5204-50 Avenue
                                     American Medical               Bellevue, WA 98004
       Yellowknife, NT XIA IE2
                                     Association                    Tel: (800) 522-2209
       Canada
                                     515 N. State Street            Online:
       Tel: (867) 669 4725
                                     Chicago, IL 60610              http://www.mbaks.com
       Online: http://eppr.arctic-
       council.org                   Tel: (312) 464-5000
                                     Online: www.ama-assn.org       NATURAL DISASTERS
       Emergency Services                                           Alzheimer’s Association
       WWW Site List                 American Medical               919 North Michigan Avenue,
       Online: www.district.north-   Women’s Association            Suite 1100
       van.bc.ca/eswsl/www-911.htm   801 N. Fairfax Street,         Chicago, Illinois 60611-1676
                                     Suite 400                      Tel: (800) 272-3900
       Southern Union Gas            Alexandria, VA 22314           Online: www.alz.org
       Company                       Tel: (703) 838-0500
       Emergency Tel:                Online: www.amwa-doc.org       American Red Cross
       (800) 959-LEAK/959-5325                                      P.O. Box 37243
                                     Canadian Health Network        Washington, DC 20013.
                                     Online: www.canadian-health-   Tel: (800) 435-7669
                                     network.ca                     Online: www.redcross.org
                                                  USEFUL ONLINE SITES AND ADDRESSES              251

Disaster Survival               The Weather Channel Online       SPECIFIC HEALTH
Planning Network                Online: www.weather.com          PROBLEMS
669 Pacific Cove Drive
                                                                 American Academy of Allergy,
Port Huenene, CA 93041          The Weather Network
                                                                 Asthma, and Immunology
Tel: (800) 601- 4899            (USA and Canada)
                                                                 611 East Wells Street
Online:                         Online:
                                                                 Milwaukee, WI 53202
www.disaster-survival.com       www.theweathernetwork.com
                                                                 Tel: (414) 272-6071
                                                                 Online: www.aaaai.org
Environmental Protection        United States
Agency                          Geological Survey
                                                                 American Academy
Ariel Rios Building             National Earthquake
                                                                 of Dermatology
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue,       Information Center
                                                                 P.O. Box 4014
N.W. Washington, DC 20460       Box 25046, DFC, MS 967
                                                                 Schaumburg,
Tel: (202) 260-2090             Denver, Colorado 80225
                                                                 IL 60168-4014
Online: www.epa.gov/            Tel: (303) 273-8500
                                                                 Tel: (847) 330-0230
                                Online: http://neic.usgs.gov
                                                                 Online: www.aad.org
Federal Emergency
Management Agency               Vortech Storm                    American Academy
Tel: (800) 480-2520             Research Organization            of Ophthalmology
Online: www.fema.gov            P.O. Box 1233                    P.O. Box 7424
                                Danbury, CT 06813-1233           San Francisco,
Geological Association          Online:                          CA 94120-7424
of Canada                       http://vortechstorm.tripod.com   Tel: (415) 561-8500
Department of Earth Sciences                                     Online: www.aao.org
Room ER4063, Alexander          home SECURITY
Murray Building                 American Society                 American Academy of
Memorial University of          for Industrial Security          Orthopaedic Surgeons
Newfoundland                    1625 Prince Street               6300 North River Road
St. John’s, NF A1B 3X5          Alexandria, Virginia             Rosemont,
CANADA                          22314-2818                       Illinois 60018-4262
Tel: (709) 737-7660             Tel: (703) 519-6200              Tel: (847) 823-7186
Online: www.gac.ca              Online: www.asisonline.org       Online:
                                                                 http://orthoinfo.aaos.org
Geological Society of America   Canadian Resource Centre
P.O. Box 9140                   for Victims of Crime             American Diabetes Association
Boulder, CO 80301-9140          100 - 141,                       1701 North Beauregard Street
Tel: (303) 447-2020             rue Catherine Street             Alexandria, VA 22311
Online: www.geosoceity.org      Ottawa, Ontario                  Tel: (800) DIABETES
                                K2P IC3                          Online: www.diabetes.org
National Oceanic and            Tel: (613) 233-7614
Atmospheric Administration      Online: www.crcvc.ca             American Epilepsy Society
National Weather Service                                         342 North Main Street
1325 East West Highway          National Organization            West Hartford,
Silver Spring, MD 20910         for Victim Assistance            CT 06117-2507
Online: www.nws.noaa.gov        1730 Park Road NW                Tel: (860) 586-7505
                                Washington DC 20010              Online: www.aesnet.org
National Severe                 Tel: (202) 232-6682
Storms Laboratory               Online: www.try-nova.org         American Gastroenterological
1313 Halley Circle                                               Association
Norman, Oklahoma 73069          The National Center              7910 Woodmont Ave.,
Tel: (405) 360-3620             for Victims of Crime             Seventh Floor,
Online: www.nssl.noaa.gov       2000 M Street NW,                Bethesda, MD 20814
                                Suite 480                        Tel: (301) 654-2055
The Global Earthquake           Washington, DC 20036             Online: www.gastro.org
Response Center                 Tel: (202) 467-8700
Online: www.earthquake.com      Online: www.ncvc.org
252   USEFUL ONLINE SITES AND ADDRESSES

       American Heart Association      Meningitis Foundation            National Electrical
       National Center                 of America Inc.                  Contractors Association
       7272 Greenville Avenue          6610 North Shadeland             3 Bethesda Metro Center,
       Dallas, TX 75231                Avenue, Suite 200                Suite 1100
       Tel: (800) AHA-USA-1            Indianapolis, Indiana            Bethesda, MD 20814
       Online:                         46220-4393                       Tel: (301) 657-3110
       www.americanheart.org           Tel: (800) 668-1129              Online: www.neca-neis.org
                                       Online: www.musa.org
       American Lung Association                                        National Glass Association
       61 Broadway, 6th Floor          National Alliance of Breast      8200 Greensboro Drive,
       NY, NY 10006                    Cancer Organizations             Suite 302
       Tel: (212) 315-8700             9 East 37th Street, 10th Floor   McLean, VA 22102-3881
       Online: www.lungusa.org         New York, NY 10016               Tel: (866) DIAL-NGA
                                       Tel: (888) 80-NABCO              Online: www.glass.org
       American Stroke Association     Online: www.nabco.org
       National Center                                                  National Pest
       7272 Greenville Avenue          National Eczema Association      Management Association
       Dallas TX 75231                 for Science and Education        8100 Oak Street
       Tel: (888) 4-STROKE             6600 SW 92nd Ave., Ste. 230      Dunn Loring, VA 22027
       Online:                         Portland, OR 97223-0704          Tel: (703) 573-8330
       www.strokeassociation.org       Tel: (800) 818-7546              Online: www.pestworld.org
                                       Online:
       Crohns and Colitis Foundation   www.nationaleczema.org           National Roofing
       of America                                                       Contractors Association
       386 Park Avenue South,          National Prostate                10255 W. Higgins Road,
       17th Floor                      Cancer Coalition                 Suite 600
       New York, NY 10016              1158 15th St., NW                Rosemont, IL 60018
       Tel: (800) 932-2423             Washington, DC 20005             Tel: (847) 299-9070
       Online: www.ccfa.org            Tel: 202-463-9455                Online: www.nrca.net
                                       Online: www.4npcc.org
       Head Injury Resource Center                                      Plumbing-Heating-Cooling
       212 Pioneer Bldg                TRADE ASSOCIATIONS               Contractors – National
       Seattle, WA 98104-2221                                           Association
                                       American Society of Heating,
       Tel: (206) 621-8558                                              180 S. Washington Street
                                       Refrigerating, and Air-
       Online: www.headinjury.com                                       P.O. Box 6808
                                       Conditioning Engineers, Inc.
                                                                        Falls Church, VA 22040
                                       1791 Tullie Circle, N.E.
       Incontinence.org                                                 Tel: (703) 237-8100
                                       Atlanta, GA 30329
       Online: www.incontinence.org                                     Online: www.phccweb.org
                                       Tel: (800) 527-4723
       International Society for       Online: www.ashrae.org
                                                                        Plumbing Related Associations
       Sexual and Impotence                                             & Organizations on the Web
       Research                        American Wood-Preservers’
                                                                        Online: www.plumbingweb.
       Online: www.issir.org           Association
                                                                        com/assn.html
                                       P.O. Box 5690
       P.O. Box 94074                  Granbury Texas 76049-0690
                                                                        Security Industry Association
       Toronto, Ontario M4N 3R1        Tel: 817-326-6300
                                                                        635 Slaters Lane, Suite 110
       Canada                          Online: www.awpa.com
                                                                        Alexandria, VA 22314-1177
       Online: www.ibsgroup.org                                         Tel: (703) 683-2075
                                       Canadian Security Industry
                                                                        Online: www.siaonline.org
       MAGNUM, Inc.                    Online: www.csio.net
       The National                                                     TRAVEL ADVICE
       Migraine Association
       113 South Saint Asaph,                                           Travel Advice
       Suite 300                                                        5545 South 1025 East
       Alexandria, VA 22314                                             South Ogden, UT 84405
       Tel: (703) 739-9384                                              Tel: (800) 854-3391
       Online: www.migraines.org                                        Online: www.traveladvice.com
                                                                                            INDEX   253

Index
A                               severe 31                         ear drops, administering 167
abdomen, swollen 126            tooth knocked-out 38              eye drops, administering 166
abdominal pain 120–1           blood                              eye ointment, administering
  children 124–5                coughing up 106                     166
  women 122–3                   in feces 132                      febrile seizures 43
abrasions 33                    in semen 152                      fever 76–7
accident prevention            boundaries of yard                 liquid medicines, giving 168
  home 172–7                    fencing, broken or unstable       nose drops, administering
  yard 178–9                      205                               166
air-conditioning problems       gate, broken or unstable 205      resuscitation techniques
  194–5                         security 179                        12–16, 18–19
airlock in water pipe 190      break-ins 216–17                   symptoms of illness, assessing
alcohol, safe limits 72, 79    breasts                              70–1
ambulance, calling 11           problems 154–5                    temperature, measuring 70
anaphylactic shock 28           self-examination 69               vomiting 118–19
animal bites 58                breathing                        chimney fire, putting out 183
ankles, swollen 148–9           checking for 14                 choking 22–3
ants 208                        checking rate 68, 71              babies 24
anus, problems 127              children’s problems 112–13      clothes on fire, putting out 182
arm                             rescue breaths, giving 16–17,   cockroaches 208
  broken 44                       19                            cold weather, extreme 230–1,
  painful 144                   shortness of breath 110–1         246
  sling 63                     broken arm 44                    complementary remedies 163
asthma attack 26               broken leg 45                    confusion 92–3
  giving medication to baby    burns 48–9                       consciousness, checking for 12
    or child 167               burst water pipe 188             constipation 132–3
attic safety 177                                                contraceptives, hormonal 159
                                                                contact lens, pain or irritation
                               C
                               car stuck in snow 231
                                                                  98
                                                                convulsions 42
B                              carbon monoxide alarms 173,        febrile 43
babies                           185                            coughing 106–7
 asthma medication, giving     cardiopulmonary resuscitation      children 108–9
   167                           see CPR                        CPR (cardiopulmonary
 choking 24                    caring for a sick person 164–9     resuscitation) 12, 18–20
 resuscitation techniques      carpet stains 210–11             cuts 33
   12–15, 17, 20               ceiling, leaking 187
back pain 140–1                central-heating problems
bandaging 61–3                   192–3                          D
bathroom safety 176            chemicals in eye 37              dehydration 128
bedroom safety 176             chest                             preventing 165
 child’s 177                     pain 134–5                     diarrhea 128–9
bees 209                         penetrating wounds 32           children 130–1
bites 57–8                     childbirth, emergency 40–1       difficulty speaking 91
bladder, poor control 137      children                         difficulty swallowing 115
bleeding                         abdominal pain 124–5           disasters, natural
 abnormal vaginal 158–9          asthma medication, giving       emergency kit 224–5
 heavy periods 157                 167                           planning for 220–5
 hormonal contraceptives 159     bedroom safety 177              post-disaster survival
 mouth 38                        breathing problems 112–13          244–9
 nose 39                         choking 22–23                  discharge, vaginal 160
 pregnancy, vaginal 158          coughing 108–9                 doors
 purpura 97                      diarrhea 130–1                  chain 213
254   INDEX

       doors (continued)                  fever 74–5                        Iimpotence 150
        hinge bolts 214                     bringing down 164
        hinges badly fitting 203            children 76–7                   injuries
        locks 212, 213,                     with rash 96–7                    head 29
          jammed 215                      fires in the home                   spinal 46
          deadbolt 214                      escaping from 181                 sprains and strains 47
          mortise lock, damaged 215         precautions 172, 173, 180       insects
          peephole 213                      putting out 182–3                 control 208–9
          security devices 212            first-aid equipment 60              stings 59
        sticking 202                      fleas 208                         intruders, dealing with
        wood rot 204                      floods 228–9                        216
                                          foot, applying a bandage 62       itchiness, relieving 165
                                          foreign object in eye 36
       E
       ear
                                          forgetfulness 92–3
                                                                            J
                                          frostbite 55
         drops, administering 167         frozen water pipes 188            joints
         earache 102                      fuse problems 197–8                 painful 146–7
       early warnings 223                                                     sprains 47
       earthquake 238–9, 243
       electrical fire, putting out 183   G
       electrical problems 196–9          garage safety 179                 K
                                                                            kitchen safety 174
       electrical wire, worn 199            protection from natural
       electricity and water, dangers       disaster 222
           of 187                         gas leaks 184–5
       emergency, action in 10–1          gate, broken or unstable 205      L
       erection failure 150               genital irritation, women 161     leg
       evacuation from home               glands, swollen 80–1                broken 45
         domestic emergencies 173         glass                               painful 145
         family disaster plan 223           replacing 200–1                 ligaments
         natural disasters 224              securing broken pane 200          sprains 47
       exercises, relaxation 169          grease stains 210–11                torn leg 145
       eye                                gutters, leaking 207              lightning 227
         chemicals in 37                                                    locks
         contact lens 98                                                      door 212, 213
         drops, administering 166         H                                   jammed 215
         foreign object in 36             hall safety 175                     mortise damaged 215
         ointment, administering 166      hand                                windows 212, 213
         painful or irritated 98–9         applying a bandage 62            loss of voice 104–5
         vision, disturbed or impaired     painful 144                      lumps 80–1
           100–1                          head injury 29                      breasts, self-examination 69
         wound 35                         headache 84–5                       scrotum 151
                                          heart                               testes 151, self-examination
                                           attack 25                            69
       Ffacial pain 90                     palpitations 136
                                          heat
       fainting 53                         exhaustion 51                    M
       family members, dealing with        exposure 246                     major seizures 42
         stranded 245                     heatstroke 52                     medicines
       faucet, leaking 190                height, assessing children’s 71    complementary remedies 163
         silencing drips 190              hoarseness 104–5                   conventional 162–3
       faulty appliance, fuse and plug    home first-aid kit 60              home medicine chest 162–3
         checks 197                       home medicine chest                liquid, giving to children 168
       febrile seizures 43                 162–3                             vomiting, effect on 117
       feeling faint 82–3                 home safety 172–7                 mice 209
       feeling unwell 72–3                hornets 209                       mortise lock, damaged 215
       fencing, broken or unstable        hurricane 234–5                   mouth
         205                              hypothermia 54                     bleeding 38
                                                                                            INDEX   255

mouth (continued)               plumbing problems 186–91         speaking, difficulty 91
 stings 59                      poisons, swallowed 56            spider bites 57
 tooth knocked-out 38           pregnancy                        spinal injuries 46
muscles                          abdominal pain 122              splinters 34
 pulled leg 145                  vaginal bleeding 158            sprains 47
 strains 47                     pulled leg muscle 145            stains on carpets and
                                pulse, taking 68                   upholstery 211
                                 children 70                     stairs safety 175
N                               purpura 97                       stings 59
neck, pain or stiffness 142–3                                    storm, severe 226
nose                                                             strains 47
 bleed 39                       R                                stroke 30
 blocked, relieving 165         radiator problems 193            structural problems 200–7
 drops, administering 166       rash 94–5                        sunburn 50
numbness 88–9                     purpura 97                     survival, post-disaster
                                  with fever 96–7                  244–9
                                rats 209                         swallowed poisons 56
O                               rectum, problems 127             swallowing, difficulty 115
overflow pipe, dripping         red wine on carpets 211          sweating, excessive 78–9
 191                            relaxation exercises 169           heat exhaustion 51
                                resuscitation techniques 12–20   swellings 80–1
                                rewiring a plug 197                abdomen 126
P                               roof, leaking 206                  ankles 148–9
pain                                                               scrotum 151
 abdominal 120–1                                                   testes 151
 arm 144                        S                                symptoms, assessing 68–69
 back 140–1                     safety                             children 70–1
 chest 134–5                      home 172–7
 eye 98–9                         yard 178–9
 facial 90                      sandbags 228                     T
                                                                 taking a pulse 68
 hand 144                       scalds 49
 joints 146–7                   scorpion stings 59                 children and babies 70
 leg 145                        scrotum, problems 151            temperature of body
 neck 142–3                     security in the home 212–14        febrile seizures 43
 periods 156                    seizures                           fever 74–5,
 urination 138–9                  febrile 43                         children 76–7
palpitations 136                  major 42                         hypothermia 54
panic attack 168                semen, blood-streaked 152          measuring with a
passing out 82–3                shed safety 179                    thermometer 68
path safety 179                 shock 27                             children 70
patio safety 179                  anaphylactic 28                tendons, strains 47
 door locks 212                 shortness of breath 110–11       testes
peephole in door 213            sink, blocked 189                  problems 151
penis problems 152–3            sitting room safety 175            self-examination 69
periods                         skillet fire, putting out 183    thermometer 68, 70
 heavy 157                      skin                             throat, sore 103
 painful 156                      general problems 94–5            difficulty swallowing
pest control 208–9                rash with fever 96–7             115
pet stains on carpets and         relieving itchiness 165          soothing 164
 upholstery 211                   stings 59                      tick bites 58
pipes, water                      sunburn 50                     tingling 88–9
 airlock in 190                 smoke alarms 173                 toilet, blocked 191
 burst 188                      snake bites 57                   tooth, knocked-out 38
 dripping overflow 191          snow, car stuck in 231           torn leg ligament 145
 frozen, thawing 188            sore throat 103                  tornado 236–7
 leaking 207                      difficulty swallowing 115      tsunami 242–3
plug, electrical 197              soothing 164                   tubular bandage 62
256   INDEX • ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

       U                                W                                 sticking 202
       unconsciousness 21, 82–3         wall socket, faulty 199           see also glass
        fainting 53                     wallpaper, grease on 211         wine on carpets 211
        resuscitation techniques        wasps 209                        women
          12–20                         water                             abdominal pain 122–3
       upholstery stains 210, 211        conservation during a            breast problems 154–5
       urine                               disaster 247                   genital irritation 161
        appearance of 138                electricity and, dangers of      periods, heavy 157,
        bladder, poor control              187                            painful 156
        137                              plumbing mishaps 186–91          vagina, abnormal bleeding
        inability to pass 137            purifying 249                      158–9,
        painful urination 138–9          tank, leaking 187                discharge 160
        pet stains on carpets and        yard safety 178                 wood rot 204
        upholstery 211                  weight                           woodworm 209
                                         assessing adults 69             wounds
                                         assessing children 71            applying a dressing 61
       V                                wheezing 114                      cuts 33
       vagina                           wildfire 232–3                    eye 35
         abnormal bleeding 158–9        windows                           grazes 33
         discharge 160                   boarding 234                     penetrating chest 32
       vertigo 86–7                      frames with wood rot 204
       vision, disturbed or impaired     hinges badly fitting 203
         100–1                           insulating 230
       voice, loss of 104–5              joints damaged 202
       volcanic eruption 240–1           locks 212, 213
       vomiting 116–17                   sash damaged 203
         children 118–19                 security devices 212

       Acknowledgments
       Cooling Brown would like to thank Derek             ILLUSTRATORS
       Coombes, Elaine Hewson, and Elly King               David Ashby, Kuo Kang Chen, Peter
       for design assistance, Kate Sheppard for            Cooling, Chris King, Patrick Mulrey,
       editorial assistance, Dennis Fell for advice        John Woodcock
       on air conditioning, and G. R. Coleman.
                                                           PHOTOGRAPHERS
       Dorling Kindersley would like to thank              Matthew Ward, Trish Grant
       Andrea Bagg and Martyn Page for their
       editorial help, and Franziska Marking for           PICTURE CREDITS
       picture research.                                   Colin Walton 210b, Corbis 236, Photodisc
                                                           240, 241, 242
       MODELS
       Philip Argent, Flora Bendall, Imogen                JACKET PICTURE CREDITS
       Bendall, Jennifer Bendall, Ross Bendall,            Pictor International front bl, front br;
       Alison Bolus, Eleanor Bolus, Dale Buckton,          Popperfoto front bc; Science Photo Library
       Angela Cameron, Madeleine Cameron,                  BSIP, Laurent front tr; Stone/Getty Images
       Shenton Dickson, Olivia King, Michel                back tc, back tl, front tc, front tl, spine.
       Labat, Janey Madlani, Tish Mills
                                                           All other images © Dorling Kindersley.
       INDEX                                               For further information see:
       Patricia Coward                                     www.dkimages.com
                              EMERGENCY
                      CONTACTS
• In the event of an emergency                                                   In case of an emergency please call
 go to the nearest telephone
 and dial 911                                                                    Name................................................................................
                                                                                 Telephone ........................................................................
• Ask for the police, ambulance                                                  Cell ...................................................................................
 or fire department

 Relative                                                                                    Place of work
 Name ..................................................................                     Name ..................................................................
 Address...............................................................                      Address...............................................................
  ............................................................................                ............................................................................
 Telephone ..........................................................                        Telephone ..........................................................
 Cell......................................................................

                                                                                              Taxi service
 Neighbour
                                                                                             Name ..................................................................
 Name ..................................................................                     Telephone ..........................................................
 Address...............................................................
  ............................................................................
                                                                                             Local police station
 Telephone ..........................................................
 Cell......................................................................                   Address...............................................................
                                                                                              ............................................................................
                                                                                              Telephone ..........................................................
 School
 Name ..................................................................
                                                                                             Landlord or superintendant
 Address...............................................................
  ............................................................................                Name ..................................................................
 Telephone ..........................................................                         Telephone ..........................................................

 School                                                                                       Burglar alarm company
 Name ..................................................................                      Name ..................................................................
 Address...............................................................                       Address...............................................................
  ............................................................................                ............................................................................
 Telephone ..........................................................                         Telephone ..........................................................
Physician                                                                      Gas
Name ..................................................................        Gas supplier .......................................................
Address...............................................................         Telephone ..........................................................
............................................................................   Gas engineer......................................................
Telephone ..........................................................           Telephone ..........................................................
Emergency telephone .......................................                    Cell......................................................................
                                                                               Location of gas main.........................................
                                                                               ............................................................................
Local hospital
Name ..................................................................
                                                                               Water
Address...............................................................
............................................................................   Water supplier ...................................................
Telephone ..........................................................           Telephone ..........................................................
                                                                               Plumber..............................................................
                                                                               Telephone ..........................................................
Local pharmacist
                                                                               Cell......................................................................
Name ..................................................................        Location of water main valve...........................
Address...............................................................         ............................................................................
............................................................................
Telephone ..........................................................
                                                                               Electricity
                                                                               Electricity supplier .............................................
Dentist
                                                                               Telephone ..........................................................
Name ..................................................................        Electrician...........................................................
Address...............................................................         Telephone ..........................................................
............................................................................   Cell......................................................................
Telephone ..........................................................           Location of service box .....................................
Emergency telephone .......................................                    ............................................................................

Vet                                                                            Contents insurance company
Name ..................................................................        Name ..................................................................
Address...............................................................         Address...............................................................
............................................................................   ............................................................................
Telephone ..........................................................           Telephone ..........................................................
Emergency telephone .......................................                    Policy number ....................................................

Town council or community board                                                Home insurance company
Telephone ..........................................................           Name...............................................................
                                                                               Address ...........................................................
                                                                               .........................................................................
Flooding information
                                                                               Telephone .......................................................
http://www.fema.gov                                                            Policy number.................................................



################################################################################
# SECTION 5: CLINICAL TREATMENT PROTOCOLS
# Source: First Aid USMLE Step 2.pdf
################################################################################

FIRST AID                                                                     ™

CASES FOR THE
USMLE
STEP 2 CK
Second Edition

TAO LE, MD, MHS
Assistant Clinical Professor of Pediatrics and Medicine
Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Department of Pediatrics
University of Louisville

ELIZABETH EBY HALVORSON, MD
Vanderbilt School of Medicine
Class of 2009
Resident
Department of Pediatrics
Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center

New York / Chicago / San Francisco / Lisbon / London / Madrid / Mexico City
Milan / New Delhi / San Juan / Seoul / Singapore / Sydney / Toronto
Copyright © 2010, 2007 by Tao Le. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be repro-
duced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

ISBN: 978-0-07-162926-3

MHID: 0-07-162926-2

The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-162570-8, MHID: 0-07-162570-4.

All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an
editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they
have been printed with initial caps.

McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a
representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.

Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are required. The authors
and the publisher of this work have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is complete and generally in accord with
the standards accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the pub-
lisher nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect accu-
rate or complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions or for the results obtained from use of the information contained in this work. Readers
are encouraged to conform the information contained herein with other sources. For example and in particular, readers are advised to check the product information
sheet included in the package of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that the information contained in this work is accurate and that changes have not been
made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for administration. This recommendation is of particular importance in connection with new or infrequent-
ly used drugs.

TERMS OF USE

This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject
to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble,
reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use
the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.

THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADE-
QUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE
ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and
its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free.
Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages
resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill
and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even
if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause
arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
                                D E D I C AT I O N

To the contributors to this and future editions, who took time to share their
knowledge, insight, and humor for the beneﬁt of all those who yearn to pass
their boards.

                                      and

To our families, friends, and loved ones, who encouraged and assisted us in
the task of assembling this guide.
This page intentionally left blank
  CONTENTS

Contributing Authors                                             xv

Senior Reviewers                                               xvii

Preface                                                         xix

Acknowledgments                                                 xxi

How to Contribute                                              xxiii

Cardiology                                                        1
    Case 1: Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm                             2
    Case 2: Acute Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema                     3
    Case 3: Acute Coronary Syndrome                               4
    Case 4: Aortic Dissection                                     6
    Case 5: Acute Myocardial Infarction—Long-Term Management      8
    Case 6: Aortic Regurgitation                                  9
    Case 7: Atrial Fibrillation                                 10
    Case 8: Cardiac Tamponade                                   12
    Case 9: Congestive Heart Failure                            14
    Case 10: Deep Venous Thrombosis                             16
    Case 11: Dilated Cardiomyopathy (Alcoholic)                 18
    Case 12: Diastolic Heart Failure                            20
    Case 13: Aortic Stenosis                                    21
    Case 14: Hypercholesterolemia                               22
    Case 15: Hypertension—Essential                             23
    Case 16: Hypertension—Renal Artery Stenosis                 24
    Case 17: Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy            26
    Case 18: Infective Endocarditis                             28
    Case 19: Myocardial Infarction                              30
    Case 20: Papillary Muscle Rupture                           32
    Case 21: Pericarditis                                       34
    Case 22: Peripheral Vascular Disease                        36
    Case 23: Mitral Regurgitation                               37
    Case 24: Second-Degree Heart Block                          38
    Case 25: Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome                     40

Dermatology                                                     43
    Case 1: Acanthosis Nigricans                                44
    Case 2: Acne Vulgaris                                       46
    Case 3: Atopic Dermatitis                                   47

                                                                  v
     Case 4: Basal Cell Carcinoma                                              48
     Case 5: Bullous Pemphigoid                                                 50
     Case 6: Herpes Simplex                                                     51
     Case 7: Hidradenitis Suppurativa                                           52
     Case 8: Kaposi Sarcoma                                                     53
     Case 9: Lichen Planus                                                      54
     Case 10: Molluscum Contagiosum                                             56
     Case 11: Pemphigus                                                         58
     Case 12: Pityriasis Rosea                                                 60
     Case 13: Psoriasis                                                        62
     Case 14: Stevens-Johnson Syndrome                                         64
     Case 15: Varicella-Zoster Virus                                           66
     Case 16: Tuberous Sclerosis                                               68
     Case 17: Onychomycosis                                                    69
     Case 18: Melanoma                                                          70

Endocrinology                                                                   71
     Case 1: Acromegaly                                                         72
     Case 2: Cushing’s Syndrome                                                 74
     Case 3: Adrenal Insufﬁciency (Addison’s Disease)                           76
     Case 4: Diabetes Insipidus                                                 77
     Case 5: Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1                                          78
     Case 6: Diabetic Ketoacidosis                                              79
     Case 7: Hyperthyroidism (Graves’ Disease)                                 80
     Case 8: Hypokalemia (Hyperaldosteronism)                                  82
     Case 9: Hyperparathyroidism                                               84
     Case 10: Hypothyroidism (Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis)                         85
     Case 11: Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type I                             86
     Case 12: Metabolic Syndrome                                               88
     Case 13: Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type II                            89
     Case 14: Osteoporosis                                                     90
     Case 15: Paget’s Disease of Bone                                          92
     Case 16: Pheochromocytoma                                                 94
     Case 17: Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion         96
     Case 18: Thyroid Nodule                                                   98
     Case 19: Subacute Granulomatous Thyroiditis (de Quervain’s Thyroiditis)   100

Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine                                           101
     Case 1: Bias and Confounding                                              102
     Case 2: Bioterrorism                                                      104
     Case 3: Breast Cancer Screening                                           106
     Case 4: Cohort Studies                                                    108
     Case 5: Health Care Screening                                             109
     Case 6: Incidence and Prevalence                                          110
     Case 7: Inﬂuenza Vaccine                                                  112

vi
    Case 8: Obesity Effects on Health                                        114
    Case 9: Randomized Clinical Trial                                        116
    Case 10: Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity                                      118
    Case 11: Reliability and Validity                                        120
    Case 12: Positive Predictive Value, and Negative Predictive Value        121

Ethics and Legal Issues                                                      123
    Case 1: Conﬁdentially and Disclosure                                     124
    Case 2: End-of-Life Issues (Advance Directives and Withdrawal of Care)   125
    Case 3: Informed Consent                                                 126
    Case 4: Minors                                                           127

Gastrointestinal                                                             129
    Case 1: Acute Cholecystitis                                              130
    Case 2: Acute Pancreatitis                                               132
    Case 3: Achalasia                                                        134
    Case 4: Carcinoid                                                        135
    Case 5: Colorectal Cancer                                                136
    Case 6: Celiac Disease                                                   138
    Case 7: Diverticulitis                                                   139
    Case 8: Esophageal Carcinoma                                             140
    Case 9: Gastroesophageal Reﬂux Disease                                   141
    Case 10: Hemochromatosis                                                 142
    Case 11: Hiatal Hernia                                                   144
    Case 12: Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease                                       146
    Case 13: Liver Cirrhosis                                                 148
    Case 14: Irritable Bowel Syndrome                                        150
    Case 15: Peptic Ulcer Disease                                            151
    Case 16: Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis                                  152
    Case 17: Pseudomembranous Colitis                                        153
    Case 18: Small Bowel Obstruction                                         154
    Case 19: Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis                               156
    Case 20: Viral Hepatitis                                                 157
    Case 21: Wilson’s Disease                                                160
    Case 22: Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome                                      162

Hematology/Oncology                                                          163
    Case 1: Acute Myelogenous Leukemia                                       164
    Case 2: Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia                                     166
    Case 3: Amyloidosis                                                      167
    Case 4: Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia                                     168
    Case 5: Factor V Leiden                                                  170
    Case 6: Fanconi’s Anemia                                                 171
    Case 7: Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deﬁciency                      172
    Case 8: Hairy Cell Leukemia                                              174

                                                                              vii
       Case 9: Hemophilia                                                            175
       Case 10: Hodgkin’s Lymphoma                                                   176
       Case 11: Microcytic Anemia                                                    178
       Case 12: Multiple Myeloma                                                     180
       Case 13: Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura                                  182
       Case 14: Neutropenia                                                          183
       Case 15: Polycythemia                                                         184
       Case 16: Sickle Cell Anemia                                                   186
       Case 17: α-Thalassemia                                                        188
       Case 18: Hemorrhage, Drug-Induced                                             190
       Case 19: Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura with Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome   191
       Case 20: Porphyria                                                            192
       Case 21: Transplant Rejection                                                 193
       Case 22: von Willebrand’s Disease                                             194

Infectious Disease                                                                   195
       Case 1: AZT-Induced Anemia                                                    196
       Case 2: Chlamydia                                                             197
       Case 3: Gonococcal Infection                                                  198
       Case 4: Histoplasmosis                                                        200
       Case 5: Infectious Mononucleosis                                              201
       Case 6: Lyme Disease                                                          202
       Case 7: Malaria                                                               204
       Case 8: Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus                           206
       Case 9: Necrotizing Fasciitis                                                 208
       Case 10: Neutropenic Fever                                                    209
       Case 11: Osteomyelitis                                                        210
       Case 12: Pneumocystosis                                                       212
       Case 13: Endocarditis                                                         214
       Case 14: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever                                         215
       Case 15: Septic Arthritis                                                     216
       Case 16: Thrombophlebitis                                                     217
       Case 17: Urinary Tract Infection                                              218

Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue                                                219
       Case 1: Ankylosing Spondylitis                                                220
       Case 2: Carpal Tunnel Syndrome                                                222
       Case 3: Compartment Syndrome                                                  223
       Case 4: Dermatomyositis                                                       224
       Case 5: Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy                                           225
       Case 6: Herniated Lumbar Disk                                                 226
       Case 7: Gout                                                                  228
       Case 8: Fibromyalgia                                                          229
       Case 9: Juvenile Rheumatic Arthritis                                          230
       Case 10: Legg-Calvé-Perthes Disease                                           231

viii
    Case 11: Osteosarcoma                            232
    Case 12: Rheumatoid Arthritis                    234
    Case 13: Scleroderma                             236
    Case 14: Spinal Stenosis                         238
    Case 15: Systemic Lupus Erythematosus            240
    Case 16: Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis       242
    Case 17: Osteoarthritis                          244
    Case 18: Takayasu Arteritis                      245
    Case 19: Temporal Arteritis                      246
    Case 20: Polymyalgia Rheumatica                  247

Neurology                                            249
    Case 1: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis            250
    Case 2: Dementia                                 252
    Case 3: Epidural Abscess                         254
    Case 4: Epidural Hematoma                        256
    Case 5: Glaucoma                                 258
    Case 6: Glioblastoma Multiforme                  260
    Case 7: Guillain-Barré Syndrome                  262
    Case 8: Headache                                 264
    Case 9: Huntington’s Disease                     266
    Case 10: Infantile Spasms                        267
    Case 11: Internuclear Ophthalmoplegia            268
    Case 12: Benign Positional Paroxysmal Vertigo    269
    Case 13: Meningitis                              270
    Case 14: Multiple Sclerosis                      272
    Case 15: Myasthenia Gravis                       275
    Case 16: Partial Complex Seizures                276
    Case 17: Stroke                                  278
    Case 18: Parkinson’s Disease                     281
    Case 19: Subacute Combined Degeneration          282
    Case 20: Subarachnoid Hemorrhage                 284
    Case 21: Subdural Hematoma                       286
    Case 22: Tonic-Clonic Seizures                   288
    Case 23: Tabes Dorsalis                          290

Obstetrics                                           291
    Case 1: Abortion                                 292
    Case 2: Contraception                            293
    Case 3: Deep Venous Thrombosis                   294
    Case 4: Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation   295
    Case 5: Ectopic Pregnancy                        296
    Case 6: Fetal Monitoring                         298
    Case 7: Gestational Diabetes                     300
    Case 8: Hydatidiform Mole                        302

                                                      ix
    Case 9: Hypertension                              303
    Case 10: Infertility                              304
    Case 11: Isoimmunization                          305
    Case 12: Mastitis                                 306
    Case 13: Normal Labor                             307
    Case 14: Normal Physiology of Pregnancy           308
    Case 15: Nutrition in Pregnancy                   309
    Case 16: Placental Abruption                      310
    Case 17: Perineal Laceration                      312
    Case 18: Placenta Previa                          313
    Case 19: Postpartum Infection                     314
    Case 20: Postpartum Hemorrhage                    316
    Case 21: Preeclampsia                             317
    Case 22: Postterm Pregnancy                       318
    Case 23: Prenatal Screening                       320
    Case 24: Preterm Labor                            321
    Case 25: Preterm Premature Rupture of Membranes   322
    Case 26: Pyelonephritis                           323
    Case 27: TORCH Infections                         324
    Case 28: Sheehan’s Syndrome                       326

Gynecology                                            327
    Case 1: Amenorrhea, Primary                       328
    Case 2: Amenorrhea, Secondary                     330
    Case 3: Breast Cancer                             331
    Case 4: Bacterial Vaginosis                       332
    Case 5: Cervical Cancer                           334
    Case 6: Chancroid                                 336
    Case 7: Fibrocystic Breast Disease                338
    Case 8: Endometriosis                             340
    Case 9: Fibroids                                  342
    Case 10: Genital Warts                            344
    Case 11: Menopause                                345
    Case 12: Ovarian Cancer                           346
    Case 13: Cervicitis                               347
    Case 14: Pelvic Inﬂammatory Disease               348
    Case 15: Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome              350
    Case 16: Postmenopausal Bleeding                  351
    Case 17: Primary Syphilis                         352
    Case 18: Toxic Shock Syndrome                     353
    Case 19: Trichomonas                              354
    Case 20: Urinary Incontinence                     356
    Case 21: Vulvovaginal Candidiasis                 357

x
Pediatrics                                            359
    Case 1: Abuse                                     360
    Case 2: Chronic Granulomatous Disease             362
    Case 3: Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia            364
    Case 4: Congenital Infections                     365
    Case 5: Crohn’s Disease                           366
    Case 6: Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip        368
    Case 7: Croup                                     370
    Case 8: Developmental Milestones                  371
    Case 9: Down Syndrome                             372
    Case 10: Duodenal Atresia                         374
    Case 11: Failure to Thrive                        376
    Case 12: Febrile Seizure                          377
    Case 13: Henoch-Schönlein Purpura                 378
    Case 14: Hirschsprung Disease                     380
    Case 15: Intussusception                          382
    Case 16: Kawasaki Disease                         384
    Case 17: Meningitis                               385
    Case 18: Necrotizing Enterocolitis                386
    Case 19: Omphalocele                              387
    Case 20: Otitis Media                             388
    Case 21: Physiologic Jaundice                     389
    Case 22: Pyloric Stenosis                         390
    Case 23: Respiratory Distress in the Newborn      391
    Case 24: Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection    392
    Case 25: Tay-Sachs Disease                        393
    Case 26: Tetralogy of Fallot                      394
    Case 27: Varicella                                396
    Case 28: Ventricular Septal Defect                398
    Case 29: Wilms’ Tumor                             399

Psychiatry                                            401
    Case 1: Amphetamine Intoxication                  402
    Case 2: Alcoholism                                404
    Case 3: Anorexia Nervosa                          405
    Case 4: Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder   406
    Case 5: Autism                                    407
    Case 6: Bulimia                                   408
    Case 7: Cocaine Dependence                        410
    Case 8: Conduct Disorder                          412
    Case 9: Delirium                                  413
    Case 10: Dissociative Fugue                       414
    Case 11: Domestic Violence                        415
    Case 12: Factitious Disorder                      416
    Case 13: Generalized Anxiety Disorder             417

                                                       xi
      Case 14: Major Depression                       418
      Case 15: Personality Disorder, Cluster A        420
      Case 16: Opioid Withdrawal                      422
      Case 17: Bipolar I Disorder                     423
      Case 18: Personality Disorder, Cluster B        424
      Case 19: Personality Disorder, Cluster C        425
      Case 20: Schizophrenia                          426
      Case 21: Posttraumatic Stress Disorder          428
      Case 22: Somatization Disorder                  429
      Case 23: Tourette’s Syndrome                    430
      Case 24: Suicidal Ideation                      432

Pulmonary                                             433
      Case 1: Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome     434
      Case 2: Acute Respiratory Failure               436
      Case 3: Asthma                                  438
      Case 4: Atypical Pneumonia                      440
      Case 5: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease   441
      Case 6: Emphysema                               442
      Case 7: Lung Cancer                             443
      Case 8: Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis           444
      Case 9: Mesothelioma                            446
      Case 10: Pulmonary Embolus                      447
      Case 11: Pleural Effusion                       448
      Case 12: Pneumothorax                           450
      Case 13: Pulmonary Hypertension                 452
      Case 14: Sarcoidosis                            453
      Case 15: Tuberculosis                           454
      Case 16: Wegener’s Granulomatosis               456
      Case 17: Sleep Apnea                            458

Renal/Genitourinary                                   459
      Case 1: Acid-Base Disorders                     460
      Case 2: Acute Interstitial Nephritis            461
      Case 3: Acute Kidney Injury                     462
      Case 4: Acute Tubular Injury                    464
      Case 5: Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia            466
      Case 6: Chronic Kidney Disease                  468
      Case 7: Erectile Dysfunction                    470
      Case 8: Glomerulonephritis                      472
      Case 9: Hypercalcemia of Malignancy             474
      Case 10: Hyperkalemia                           476
      Case 11: Hypernatremia                          478
      Case 12: Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State       479
      Case 13: Hypocalcemia                           480

xii
    Case 14: Nephrolithiasis                                    482
    Case 15: Nephrotic Syndrome                                 483
    Case 16: Polycystic Kidney Disease                          484
    Case 17: Renal Cell Carcinoma                               486
    Case 18: Renal Tubular Acidosis                             487
    Case 19: Renovascular Hypertension/Secondary Hypertension   488
    Case 20: Testicular Cancer                                  490
    Case 21: Traumatic Urethral Injury                          491

Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine                           493
    Case 1: Acetaminophen Overdose                              494
    Case 2: Anaphylactic Shock                                  495
    Case 3: Appendicitis, Acute                                 496
    Case 4: Bites, Animal and Human                             498
    Case 5: Burn, Thermal                                       500
    Case 6: Atrial Fibrillation                                 502
    Case 7: Carbon Monoxide Poisoning                           503
    Case 8: Cardiac Arrest                                      504
    Case 9: Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT)                          505
    Case 10: Drowning                                           506
    Case 11: Organophosphate Poisoning, Acute                   508
    Case 12: Retinal Detachment                                 510
    Case 13: Supraventricular Tachycardia                       512
    Case 14: Sepsis                                             514
    Case 15: Syncope                                            515
    Case 16: Testicular Torsion                                 516
    Case 17: Trauma, Fracture, Orbital                          517
    Case 18: Mesenteric Ischemia, Acute                         518
    Case 19: Trauma, Fracture, Pelvis                           519
    Case 20: Trauma, Penetrating, Neck                          520
    Case 21: Wernicke’s Encephalopathy                          522
    Case 22: Trauma, Penetrating, Abdomen                       524

Appendix                                                        525

Index                                                           533

About the Authors                                               551

                                                                xiii
This page intentionally left blank
   CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Karl Benedict Bezak                             Jackie Landess
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine        Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Class of 2010                                   Class of 2010

Yuriy Bronshteyn                                Mark Newton, MD
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine        Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Class of 2010                                   Class of 2009

Elizabeth Eby Halvorson, MD                     John W. Wood, MD
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine        Resident
Class of 2009                                   Department of Otolaryngology
Resident                                        Jackson Memorial Hospital
Department of Pediatrics                        University of Miami
Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center

Kim Jiramongkolchai
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Class of 2010

                                                                                           xv
This page intentionally left blank
   SENIOR REVIEWERS
Ebere Chukwu, MD                                                       Derek Riebau, MD
Clinical Fellow                                                        Assistant Professor
Department of Medicine                                                 Department of Neurology
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine                                    Stroke Center
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                               Vanderbilt University School of Medicine

Nathaniel Clark, MD                                                    Charles Rush, MD
Assistant Professor                                                    Assistant Professor and Clerkship Director
Department of Psychiatry                                               Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Vanderbilt University Medical Center                                   Vanderbilt University School of Medicine

Titus Daniels, MD                                                      Heidi Schaefer, MD
Assistant Professor                                                    Assistant Professor
Department of Medicine                                                 Department of Medicine
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                               Vanderbilt University School of Medicine

Agnes Fogo, MD                                                         Richard Stein, MD
John L. Shapiro Professor of Pathology and Professor of Medicine       Professor
   and Pediatrics                                                      Department of Medicine
Department of Pathology                                                Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
                                                                       Thomas Talbot, MD, MPH
G. Waldon Garriss III, MD                                              Assistant Professor of Preventive Medicine
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics                Department of Medicine
Associate Chair of Ambulatory Education                                Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Associate Director of Internal Medicine-Pediatrics Residency Program
Associate Director of Internal Medicine Residency Program              Amy Weeks, MD
Department of Medicine
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                               Assistant Professor
                                                                       Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
                                                                       Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Joyce Johnson, MD
Professor                                                              John Zic, MD
Department of Pathology
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine                               Assistant Professor
                                                                       Department of Medicine
                                                                       Division of Dermatology
Greg Plemmons, MD                                                      Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Assistant Professor
Department of Pediatrics
Division of Hospital Medicine
Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt

Camiron Pfennig, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Emergency Medicine
Assistant Director, Undergraduate Medical Education
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Department of Medicine
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine

                                                                                                                    xvii
This page intentionally left blank
PREFACE

   With First Aid Cases for the USMLE Step 2 CK, we continue our commit-
   ment to providing students with the most useful and up-to-date preparation
   guides for the USMLE Step 2 CK. This new edition represents an outstand-
   ing effort by a talented group of authors and includes the following:

      Commonly asked question stems on the USMLE Step 2 CK integrated
       into a single USMLE-style case
      Concise yet complete explanations
      Two-column format for easy self-quizzing
      High-yield images, diagrams, and tables complement the questions and
       answers
      Organized as a perfect supplement to First Aid for the USMLE Step 2 CK
   We invite you to share your thoughts and ideas to help us improve First Aid
   Cases for the USMLE Step 2 CK. See How to Contribute, p. xxiii.

                            Louisville, KY             Tao Le
                            Winston-Salem, NC          Elizabeth Eby Halvorson

                                                                                 xix
This page intentionally left blank
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

   This has been a collaborative project from the start. We gratefully acknowledge
   the thoughtful comments and advice of the residents, international medical
   graduates, and faculty who have supported the authors in the development of
   First Aid Cases for the USMLE Step 2 CK.

   Additional thanks to the following for reviewing manuscript: Daniel Birchmore,
   MD and Meredith Pugh, MD.

   Thanks to our publisher, McGraw-Hill, for the valuable assistance of their
   staff. For enthusiasm, support, and commitment to this challenging project,
   thanks to our editor, Catherine Johnson. For outstanding editorial work, we
   thank Isabel Nogueira. A special thanks to Rainbow Graphics for remarkable
   production work. For support and encouragement throughout the process, we
   are grateful to Thao Pham, Selina Franklin, and Louise Petersen.

                            Louisville, KY              Tao Le
                            Winston-Salem, NC           Elizabeth Eby Halvorson

                                                                                     xxi
This page intentionally left blank
    HOW TO CONTRIBUTE

To continue to produce a high-yield review source for the USMLE Step 2 CK exam, you are invited to
submit any suggestions or corrections. The First Aid Team also offers paid internships in medical educa-
tion and publishing ranging from three months to one year (see below for details). Please send us your
suggestions for:
     High-yield USMLE Step 2 CK cases
     New facts, mnemonics, diagrams, and illustrations
     Low-yield cases to remove

For each entry incorporated into the next edition, you will receive a $10 gift certiﬁcate, as well as per-
sonal acknowledgment in the next edition. Diagrams, tables, partial entries, updates, corrections, and
study hints are also appreciated, and signiﬁcant contributions will be compensated at the discretion of
the authors. Also let us know about material in this edition that you feel is low yield and should be de-
leted.
The preferred way to submit entries, suggestions, or corrections is via our blog:
                                                       www.ﬁrstaidteam.com.

Otherwise, please send entries, neatly written or typed, or on disk (Microsoft Word), to:
                                                           First Aid Team
                                                   914 N. Dixie Avenue, Suite 100
                                                     Elizabethtown, KY 42701

    N OT E TO CO N T R I B U TO R S

All entries become property of the authors and are subject to editing and reviewing. Please verify all data
and spellings carefully. In the event that similar or duplicate entries are received, only the ﬁrst entry re-
ceived will be used. Include a reference to a standard textbook to facilitate veriﬁcation of the fact. Please
follow the style, punctuation, and format of this edition if possible.

    I N T E R N S H I P O P P O RT U N I T I E S

The author team is pleased to offer part-time and full-time paid internships in medical education and pub-
lishing to motivated medical students and physicians. Internships may range from three months (e.g., a
summer) up to a full year. Participants will have an opportunity to author, edit, and earn academic credit on
a wide variety of projects, including the popular First Aid series. English writing/ editing experience, famil-
iarity with Microsoft Word, and Internet access are required. Go to our blog www.ﬁrstaidteam.com to ap-
ply for an internship. A sample of your work or a proposal of a speciﬁc project is helpful.

                                                                                                           xxiii
This page intentionally left blank
Cardiology

Case 1       2

Case 2       3

Case 3       4

Case 4       6

Case 5       8

Case 6       9

Case 7       10

Case 8       12

Case 9       14

Case 10      16

Case 11      18

Case 12      20

Case 13      21

Case 14      22

Case 15      23

Case 16      24

Case 17      26

Case 18      28

Case 19      30

Case 20      32

Case 21      34

Case 22      36

Case 23      37

Case 24      38

Case 25      40

                  1
              CASE 1                      A 90-year-old man with a history of coronary artery disease, hypertension, and a 30-pack-
                                           year smoking history presents to the outpatient clinic for his annual checkup. He denies
                                           recent complaints, although reports that he has not been as “active” lately. He has a
                                           history of good adherence to health maintenance recommendations, and results of
                                           recent colonoscopy and prostate examination are negative. He takes aspirin, metoprolol,
                                           and an occasional multivitamin. He admits to having problems with smoking cessation.
                                           Vital signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 120/80
                                           mm Hg, pulse rate of 60/min, and respiratory rate of 10/min. Physical examination
                                           shows a thin, elderly man with mottled skin. His head, ears, eyes, nose, and throat
                                           (HEENT); neck; chest; and cardiac examinations are unremarkable. His abdomen
                                           is nontender and nondistended, but a pulsating mass is palpated approximately 2 cm
                                           superior to his umbilicus, 1 cm left of midline.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        A pulsatile abdominal mass suggests an abdominal aortic aneurysm
                                                         (AAA). Approximately 30% of AAAs are discovered during routine
                                                         physical examinations, although they are more difﬁcult to detect in
                                                         obese patients or when the aneurysm is small.

              What is the epidemiology of this          AAAs occur almost exclusively in people > 60 years old (approximately
                 condition?                              4–9% of people > 60 have an AAA) and account for approximately
                                                         15,000 deaths per year in the United States. An AAA is associated with
                                                         advanced age, atherosclerosis, smoking, hypertension, and a family
                                                         history of AAA.
              What is the natural history of this       Most, if not all, AAAs tend to grow. Morbidity and mortality are

CARDIOLOGY
                 condition?                              related primarily to the risk of rupture, which is directly proportional
                                                         to aneurysm size (risk is markedly increased in aneurysms > 5.5 cm in
                                                         diameter), and may be independently related to the rate of aneurysm
                                                         growth. The risk of rupture is also increased by female gender,
                                                         continued smoking, uncontrolled hypertension, and increased aortic
                                                         wall stress.
              What is the most appropriate              The primary management decision in patients with AAAs is either
                 treatment for this condition?           surgery (open or endovascular) or watchful waiting. All symptomatic
                                                         AAAs should be promptly repaired; repair is also recommended for
                                                         patients with asymptomatic AAAs that are > 5.5 cm in diameter or
                                                         have grown 0.5 cm within a 6-month period. Patients with smaller
                                                         aneurysms should be referred to a vascular specialist and followed by
                                                         abdominal ultrasound; they should be prescribed β-blockers to control
                                                         hypertension and counseled to cease smoking.

              What is the prognosis for this            In a recent trial of about 1000 patients with medium-sized aneurysms,
                 patient over time?                      those who received early elective surgery had signiﬁcantly better
                                                         survival rates than those who underwent surveillance only. This
                                                         patient’s prognosis depends on the size of his aneurysm, rate of growth,
                                                         blood pressure control, and smoking cessation, as well as the chosen
                                                         treatment strategy.

             2
 CASE 2                        A 63-year-old woman with a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension presents to
                                the emergency department complaining that she feels short of breath. She reports that
                                she began having difﬁculty breathing over the past week, which has progressed to the
                                point that she can no longer walk up one ﬂight of stairs without feeling short of breath.
                                She was previously able to walk ﬁve blocks before becoming short of breath. She denies
                                any history of heart or lung disease, cough or hemoptysis, chest pain, swelling of the
                                extremities, or fever. She takes no medication. Vitals signs include a temperature of
                                37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 170/90 mm Hg, pulse rate of 95/min, respiratory
                                rate of 22/min, and oxygen saturation of 92% on room air. Physical examination reveals
                                that her lungs have crackles at the bases bilaterally, and her cardiac examination reveals
                                a point of maximum impulse at the sixth intercostal space at the midaxillary line.
                                There is no clubbing, cyanosis, or edema of the extremities. X-ray of the chest reveals
                                perivascular haziness, interstitial edema, and an enlarged cardiac silhouette.

 What conditions should be                    In a patient with new-onset dyspnea, tachypnea, borderline hypoxemia,
  included in the differential                 crackles, interstitial pulmonary edema, and cardiomegaly, the
  diagnosis?                                   differential diagnosis includes both cardiac and pulmonary disease.
                                               Lung infections, pulmonary edema, pulmonary hemorrhage/
                                               contusion, pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, mechanical
                                               impairment of ventilation, anemia, sepsis, and acute heart failure
                                               should be included in the differential.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?           Acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. This patient’s acute dyspnea in the
                                               presence of crackles, pulmonary edema, and cardiomegaly suggest an

                                                                                                                             CARDIOLOGY
                                               acute exacerbation of chronic heart failure. Systolic dysfunction is the
                                               most common cause of cardiogenic pulmonary edema and is most often
                                               due to coronary artery disease, hypertension, valvular heart disease, or
                                               idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. However, this patient’s long-standing
                                               hypertension, diabetes, cardiomegaly, advanced age, and female gender
                                               all increase the likelihood of diastolic dysfunction. Acute diastolic
                                               dysfunction can occur during episodes of ischemia or with hypertension.
                                               Elevated blood pressure during an episode of congestive heart failure
                                               should raise the suspicion of diastolic dysfunction.
 What tests could be used to                  An echocardiogram is the most important diagnostic test in the workup
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                        of new congestive heart failure. It can distinguish possible etiologies
                                               and evaluate the severity of the disease. A preserved ejection fraction
                                               and left ventricular hypertrophy on echocardiography would support
                                               the clinical diagnosis of diastolic dysfunction. In addition, an arterial
                                               blood gas, plasma B-type natriuretic peptide, CBC (to evaluate for
                                               anemia), serum electrolytes (to evaluate for renal dysfunction), a 12-
                                               lead electrocardiogram (to evaluate for ischemia/infarction), and a
                                               TSH level (to evaluate for hypothyroidism) or hyperthyroidism should
                                               be considered in the workup of this patient’s dyspnea.
 What is the most appropriate                 Patients with acute hypoxemia should receive supplemental oxygen,
  treatment for this patient?                  regardless of the etiology. If necessary, noninvasive positive pressure
                                               ventilation may be utilized. Intravenous morphine sulfate can be used
                                               to decrease sympathetic outﬂow, which can reduce patient anxiety
                                               and vascular tone, decreasing cardiac ﬁlling pressures and improving
                                               cardiac output. Loop diuretics such as furosemide are important in
                                               the management of acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema, leading to
                                               volume reduction and improved cardiopulmonary pressure dynamics.
                                               In refractory disease, inotropic support with dopamine, dobutamine,
                                               or milrinone may be considered. If myocardial ischemia is suspected,
                                               appropriate management is indicated.
                                                                                                                         3
              CASE 3                    A 70-year-old man presents to the emergency department complaining of central chest
                                         pain that has been getting worse in the past 3 days, although he reports he is not in
                                         pain currently. He reports a history of “squeezing” pain in his chest for the past 5 years
                                         that occurs occasionally with physical exertion and resolves with rest; this pain has
                                         been occurring at rest for the past 3 days, is occurring more frequently (up to 6 times
                                         per day), and lasts a few minutes longer than usual. His medical history is signiﬁcant
                                         for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, a 40-pack-year smoking history, and a family
                                         history of heart disease. Vital signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood
                                         pressure of 130/90 mm Hg, pulse rate of 80/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, and oxygen
                                         saturation of 99% on room air. His physical examination is remarkable for slightly
                                         decreased breath sounds bilaterally and a normal cardiac examination. X-ray of the
                                         chest reveals clear lungs with a normal-sized heart and mediastinum. An ECG is shown
                                         in Figure 1-1.

CARDIOLOGY

                                         FIGURE 1-1.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Fuster V, Alexander RW, O’Rourke RA,
                                         eds.; Roberts R, King SB III, Nash IS, Prystowsky EN, assoc. eds. Hurst’s The Heart, 11th ed.
                                         New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 51-5.)

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       This patient’s clinical presentation and the ECG showing ST-segment
                                                        depression of > 1 mm in leads V4–V6 (see Figure 1-1) is consistent
                                                        with ischemia and should be considered acute coronary syndrome
                                                        (ACS). ACS can be subdivided into ST-elevation myocardial infarction
                                                        (STEMI), unstable angina and non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction
                                                        (NSTEMI); an ST-elevation MI cannot be diagnosed in this case given
                                                        the absence of ST elevation on ECG. Unstable angina and NSTEMI
                                                        can be distinguished by the presence of positive serum biomarkers for
                                                        an NSTEMI (troponin I, CK, CK-MB); regardless, their treatment is
                                                        similar.

             4
 What are the immediate next          ABCs (Airway, Breathing, Circulation) assessed and secured
  steps in management?                 12-lead ECG
                                       Cardiac monitor
                                       Oxygen
                                       IV access
                                       Resuscitation equipment at hand
                                       Chewed oral aspirin (162 or 325 mg)
                                       Nitrates and morphine
                                       Heparin
                                       β-blocker (if no hypotension, in cardiogenic shock or high degree
                                        AVN block)
                                       Insulin as needed to normalize blood glucose

 What is the pathophysiology of      All syndromes of myocardial ischemia fall on the same spectrum of
  this condition?                     pathophysiologic changes. Ischemic chest pain (angina) is produced
                                      when myocardium becomes ischemic; this occurs when the oxygen
                                      demand of the myocardial tissue outstrips its supply. Typically, stable
                                      angina is due to increased myocardial demand (exertion, tachycardia,
                                      positive inotropy) in the presence of diminished oxygen supply (ﬁxed
                                      stenotic coronary artery lesion, anemia). Unstable angina is thought to
                                      occur when a stable coronary atherosclerotic plaque acutely ruptures
                                      and thromboses, leading to a suddenly decreased blood supply that
                                      threatens a particular region of myocardium. An NSTEMI occurs
                                      when this leads to infarction (measured by serum biomarkers) without
                                      ST-segment elevation. An ST-elevation MI (STEMI) occurs due to
                                      transmural injury, causing ST elevations.

                                                                                                                    CARDIOLOGY
 What is the most appropriate next   The next step, after immediate medical therapy as described above,
  step in management?                 is risk stratiﬁcation using the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction
                                      (TIMI) risk score to determine how aggressive a therapeutic approach
                                      is warranted. The TIMI risk scores gives one point for the presence of
                                      each of the following:
                                       Age ≥ 65 years.
                                       Presence of > two risk factors for coronary heart disease.
                                       Prior coronary stenosis of > 50%.
                                       Presence of ST-segment deviation on initial ECG.
                                       At least two anginal episodes in prior 24 hours.
                                       Elevated serum cardiac biomarkers.
                                       Use of aspirin in prior 7 days.

                                      There are two options for management of patients who present with an
                                      acute coronary syndrome due to unstable angina or NSTEMI:
                                       An early invasive strategy: This option is used for high-risk patients
                                        (i.e., those with TIMI risk score 3 and above, patients with elevated
                                        cardiac enzymes, ST-segment depression, recurrent angina, sustained
                                        ventricular tachycardia or hemodynamic instability, or prior PCI or
                                        CABG). Coronary angiography is performed between 4 and 24 hours
                                        after admission, followed by appropriate revascularization with PCI
                                        or CABG.
                                       Patients with only one or two points undergo stress testing, with
                                        subsequent invasive imaging depending on the stress test results or
                                        recurrence of anginal symptoms.

                                                                                                                5
              CASE 4                      A 62-year-old man with a history of poorly controlled hypertension comes to the
                                           emergency department complaining of 1 hour of intense pain in his chest. He was
                                           climbing the stairs at home when he felt a sudden, sharp pain in the center of his
                                           chest, and felt light-headed. He still feels light-headed and reports that the pain is a
                                           “stabbing,” 10 out of 10 pain that radiates throughout his chest. He denies any other
                                           medical history, but on further questioning reveals that he smokes one pack of cigarettes
                                           daily and takes his metoprolol only when he feels “sick” or has a headache. Vital signs
                                           include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 170/100 mm Hg, pulse
                                           rate of 85/min, and respiratory rate of 15/min. Physical examination shows a well-
                                           developed, well-nourished, uncomfortable man with slight diaphoresis. His HEENT
                                           and neck examinations are unremarkable. His lung ﬁelds are clear to auscultation and
                                           he has good breath sounds bilaterally. His heart has a regular rate and rhythm with
                                           a 2/6 diastolic murmur along the right sternal border. Examination of his extremities
                                           reveals an absent right radial pulse. His abdominal and neurologic examinations are
                                           unremarkable. X-ray of the chest shows clear lung ﬁelds and a widened mediastinum.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        The sudden onset of sharp or “tearing” chest pain should immediately
                                                         suggest an acute aortic dissection, one of the most life-threatening
                                                         causes of chest pain. The pulse deﬁcit in the right upper extremity,
                                                         light-headedness, and widened mediastinum on chest x-ray further
                                                         point to aortic dissection. These ﬁndings also indicate that the
                                                         dissection is occurring in the ascending aorta and involves at least the
                                                         right brachiocephalic and right common carotid arteries. Tobacco
                                                         use and hypertension are the two most common risk factors for aortic

CARDIOLOGY
                                                         dissection.

              How is this condition classiﬁed?          Aortic dissections are classiﬁed using one of two anatomic systems:
                                                          The DeBakey classiﬁcation:
                                                            Type 1: Dissection of ascending and descending thoracic aorta
                                                            Type 2: Dissection of ascending aorta only
                                                            Type 3: Dissection of descending aorta only
                                                          The Stanford classiﬁcation:
                                                            Type A: Any dissection involving the ascending aorta
                                                            Type B: All other dissections

                                                         Given his light-headedness (may reﬂect carotid artery involvement)
                                                         and the murmur (may represent aortic insufﬁciency), this patient likely
                                                         has a Stanford type A dissection.

              In addition to tobacco use and             Aortic coarctation.
                 hypertension, what other risk            Bicuspid aortic valve.
                 factors are often present in             Collagen disorders (e.g., Marfan’s syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos
                 patients with this condition?              syndrome).
                                                          Crack cocaine use.
                                                          Inﬂammatory vascular disorder (e.g., Takayasu’s arteritis, giant cell
                                                            arteritis, rheumatoid arthritis, syphilitic aortitis).
                                                          Preexisting aortic aneurysm.
                                                          Previous cardiac procedures (e.g., aortic valve replacement, cardiac
                                                            catheterization, coronary artery bypass grafting).
                                                          Turner’s syndrome.

             6
 What is the most appropriate    Dissections involving the ascending aorta are surgical emergencies,
  treatment for this condition?   whereas dissections conﬁned to the descending aorta are initially
                                  treated medically. Hemodynamically unstable patients should be
                                  intubated and undergo transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) at
                                  the bedside. Intravenous β-blockers should be titrated to the lowest
                                  tolerable blood pressure. Patients may present with hypotension for a
                                  variety of reasons, including blood loss, cardiac tamponade, or cardiac
                                  muscle failure; therefore, inotropic agents should be avoided until the
                                  etiology of hypotension is established. Deﬁnitive management in this
                                  patient with a presumed Stanford type A dissection is prompt surgical
                                  repair.

                                                                                                                CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                            7
              CASE 5                      A 55-year-old homeless man presents to the emergency department complaining of
                                           chest pain, profuse sweating, and shortness of breath. ECG demonstrates ST elevation
                                           in leads V4–5 and elevation in troponin I. The man consents to cardiac catheterization
                                           but tells the attending cardiologist that he will not be able to take medicine after
                                           leaving because he has no money or insurance. Forty minutes later, he is taken to the
                                           catheterization lab, where a 70% occlusion of the LAD is evident and a stent is placed.

              Should a bare metal stent (BMS)           BMS. The most important post-stent considerations are restenosis
                 or drug-eluting stent (DES) be          and thrombosis. A DES has lower rates of restenosis and target lesion
                 placed?                                 revascularization but has higher rates of late stent thrombosis (LST).
                                                         Because of the risk of LST, clopidogrel and aspirin must be taken for
                                                         12 months following DES placement. Indications for BMS placement
                                                         include the following:
                                                          Patients poorly compliant with dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin
                                                           and clopidogrel or who may require cessation of antiplatelet therapy
                                                           for surgery within the year.
                                                          Patients who are at high risk for bleeding, such as those on long-term
                                                           warfarin therapy.

              What medications should post-MI            Antiplatelet therapy: aspirin indeﬁnitely and clopidogrel for at least
                 patients be prescribed to reduce          1 month (BMS) or 12 months (DES).
                 mortality?                               β-blocker.
                                                          ACE inhibitor.
                                                          Aldosterone inhibitor (for patients on ACE inhibitor with EF < 40%

CARDIOLOGY
                                                           and intact renal function).
                                                          Statin.

              What are the causes of acute renal         Atheroembolism: suggested by persistent renal failure > 7 days, other
                 failure immediately following             signs of embolism such as digital ischemia or SMA syndrome, and
                 PCI?                                      transient eosinophilia and hypocomplementemia.
                                                          Radiocontrast nephropathy.
                                                          Hemodynamic instability: renal hypoperfusion during periods of
                                                           hypotension.
              What is reperfusion injury (RI),          RI is a poorly understood process of injury to cardiac myocytes and
                 and what are the symptoms?              vascular endothelium caused by restoring blood ﬂow after occlusion.
                                                         It is thought to be due to production of oxygen free radicals, altered
                                                         metabolism and Ca2+ handling, and inﬂammatory activation.
                                                         Manifestations include:
                                                          Myocardial stunning: prolonged postischemic dysfunction of viable
                                                            tissue salvaged by reperfusion.
                                                          Microvascular dysfunction: endothelial disfunction may result in
                                                            vasoconstriction, platelet and WBC activation, increased oxygen
                                                            production, and protein extravasation. This may result in a “no ﬂow”
                                                            phenomenon.
                                                          Lethal reperfusion injury: contraction band necrosis may occur with
                                                            reperfusion of severely ischemic myocardium.
                                                          Arrhythmias: due to a combination of the above processes.

              What is the incidence of                  Sustained arrhythmias last > 30 seconds. Sustained ventricular
                 sustained ventricular arrhythmia        arrhythmia occurrence with STEMI is approximately 10% and with
                 following MI?                           NSTEMI 2.1%. Those who develop sustained ventricular arrhythmias
                                                         greater than 48 hours after MI should undergo ICD placement due to
                                                         the risk of recurrence.

             8
 CASE 6                       A 75-year-old man with a history of Marfan’s syndrome presents to his physician
                               complaining of a 6-month history of shortness of breath. He says his exercise tolerance
                               has gradually decreased from 10 blocks on level ground to about 1 block and is limited
                               by shortness of breath. He also reports shortness of breath at night, as well as generalized
                               fatigue, occasional palpitations, and feeling like his heart is “pounding,” especially
                               when he lies on his left side. On physical examination, he appears in no acute distress
                               and is a tall, thin man with a marfanoid body habitus. Vital signs include a temperature
                               of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 160/50 mm Hg, pulse rate of 80/min, respiratory
                               rate of 12/min, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. He has a laterally displaced
                               point of maximum impulse; distant heart sounds; a high-pitched, blowing early diastolic
                               murmur heard best at the left sternal border that is decreased by the Valsalva maneuver;
                               clear lungs; and peripheral pulses with sharp upstrokes and downstrokes.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?          Progressive dyspnea in a patient with a widened pulse pressure and a
                                              diastolic murmur suggests aortic regurgitation or insufﬁciency (AR) or
                                              mitral stenosis. In this patient, who also has “water-hammer” peripheral
                                              pulses and Marfan’s syndrome (an AR risk factor), AR is the most likely
                                              diagnosis.

 What is the pathophysiology of              With an incompetent aortic valve, a portion of the ejected systolic
  this condition?                             stroke volume leaks back into the left ventricle (LV) during diastole,
                                              leading to an increased LV end-diastolic volume. The LV enlarges
                                              and the myocardium hypertrophies in response to this increased wall
                                              stress to maintain normal LV end-diastolic pressure and an adaptively

                                                                                                                              CARDIOLOGY
                                              increased stroke volume. Over time, the LV thins and dilates in
                                              response to this volume overload.
 What other physical signs may                Becker’s sign: visible pulsations of retinal arteries and pupils.
  accompany this condition?                    deMusset’s sign: a head bob with each heartbeat.
                                               Duroziez’s sign: systolic and diastolic bruit when the femoral artery is
                                                partially compressed.
                                               Gerhard’s sign: systolic pulsations of the spleen.
                                               Hill’s sign: popliteal cuff systolic pressure exceeding brachial pressure
                                                by > 60 mm Hg.
                                               Mayne’s sign: > 15 mm Hg decrease in diastolic blood pressure with
                                                arm elevation.
                                               Mueller’s sign: systolic uvular pulsations.
                                               Quincke’s pulses: capillary pulsations in ﬁngertips or lips.
                                               Rosenbach’s sign: systolic pulsations of the liver.
                                               Traube’s sign: systolic and diastolic sounds over the femoral artery
                                                (pistol-shot pulse).
 What are the next steps in                  An echocardiogram is essential and will conﬁrm the diagnosis
  management?                                 by evaluating the degree of valvular dysfunction and myocardial
                                              compensation. Initial management includes vasodilation, diuresis, and
                                              possibly digoxin, depending on systolic function. Once medical therapy
                                              is begun, workup for causes and assessment of need for valve surgery
                                              should be undertaken. In asymptomatic patients with severe AR who
                                              have left ventricular enlargement and normal LV systolic function,
                                              surgery may be forgone for vasodilator therapy, which reduces afterload
                                              and effectively shunts a greater proportion of the ejection fraction into
                                              the systemic circulation. In this patient with Marfan’s syndrome, the
                                              most important determinant of the need for surgery is the diameter of
                                              the aortic root, as aortitis of any cause (syphilis, rheumatologic diseases)
                                              can dilate the aorta and cause aortic insufﬁciency.

                                                                                                                         9
              CASE 7                    A 75-year-old man with a past medical history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension
                                         presents to the emergency department complaining of the sudden onset of shortness
                                         of breath accompanied by palpitations beginning 6 hours ago. The palpitations last
                                         for approximately 10 minutes at a time and recur at least once an hour. He admits to a
                                         5-year history of intermittent similar symptoms. He denies chest pain, cough, or light-
                                         headedness. He takes no medications and does not smoke cigarettes, but admits to
                                         drinking six to eight beers per day over the past 3 days. Vital signs include a temperature
                                         of 37.2°C (98.9°F), blood pressure of 135/90 mm Hg, pulse rate of 130/min, and
                                         respiratory rate of 22/min. The patient is speaking in full sentences, has a midline
                                         trachea, and has no inspiratory rales, dullness to percussion, or increased tactile fremitus
                                         over the lung ﬁelds. His heart examination is notable for an irregularly irregular rhythm
                                         without murmurs; there is no chest wall tenderness. An ECG is shown in Figure 1-2.

CARDIOLOGY

                                         FIGURE 1-2.       ECG characteristic of atrial ﬁbrillation.   (Reproduced, with permission,
                                         from Fuster V, Alexander RW, O’Rourke RA, eds.; Roberts R, King SB III, Nash IS, Prystowsky
                                         EN, assoc. eds. Hurst’s The Heart, 11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 29-1.)

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Atrial ﬁbrillation (AF). This is the most common chronic arrhythmia,
                                                        and the only common arrhythmia in which the ventricular rate can be
                                                        rapid and irregular. Atrial ﬂutter is often confused with AF; however,
                                                        atrial ﬂutter has a rapid regular ventricular response with a rate about
                                                        150 beats per minute and the characteristic ECG ﬁnding of ﬂutter
                                                        waves.

              How is this condition classiﬁed?          First detected (at initial presentation)
                                                         Recurrent (having occurred more than once)
                                                         Paroxysmal (episodes lasting < 7 days)
                                                         Persistent (episodes lasting > 7 days)
                                                         Permanent (failed cardioversion, lasted > 1 year, or if further attempts
                                                          to terminate the rhythm are considered futile)

             10
 What risk factors are associated   Hypertensive and coronary heart disease are the most common
  with an increased incidence of     underlying disorders in patients with AF, although the other main
  this condition?                    causes can be remembered using the mnemonic “THE ATRIAL
                                     FIBS”:
                                     Thyroid disease (hyperthyroidism, thyrotoxicosis)
                                     Hypothermia
                                     Embolism (pulmonary)
                                     Alcohol
                                     Trauma (cardiac contusion)
                                     Recent surgery (e.g., CABG)
                                     Ischemia
                                     Atrial enlargement
                                     Lone/idiopathic
                                     Fever/anemia/high-output states
                                     Infarct
                                     Bad valves (mitral stenosis)
                                     Stimulants (caffeine, theophylline, cocaine, amphetamine)
 What is the most appropriate       ABCD: Anticoagulation, Beta-blockers, Calcium channel blockers/
  treatment for this condition?      Cardioversion, Digoxin.
                                     For recurrent paroxysmal AF with minimal or infrequent symptoms,
                                     anticoagulation (with warfarin) and rate control (with β-blockers or
                                     calcium channel blockers) are the current ACC/AHA/ESC guidelines.
                                     For patients with recurrent persistent or permanent AF, or for
                                     patients with frequent or disabling symptoms, antiarrhythmic drug

                                                                                                                 CARDIOLOGY
                                     therapy is indicated for rhythm control in addition to rate control and
                                     anticoagulation. Alternatively, surgery, ablation, or implantable devices
                                     may be used in patients who cannot tolerate antiarrhythmic drug
                                     therapy.
                                     In patients with acute-onset AF and hemodynamic instability, electrical
                                     cardioversion is indicated. If the duration of the AF is unknown or >
                                     48 hours, or the patient is at high risk of embolization, transesophageal
                                     echocardiography (TEE) is performed to locate atrial clots prior to
                                     cardioversion. Alternatively, cardioversion may be delayed for 6 weeks
                                     for anticoagulation with warfarin to minimize the risk of embolization
                                     in a stable patient.

                                                                                                           11
              CASE 8                     A 23-year-old man is brought by ambulance to the emergency department after being
                                          stabbed in the chest during a ﬁght. The initial history discloses he has no allergies,
                                          takes no medications, has no signiﬁcant past medical history, and last ate about 3 hours
                                          ago. He complains of severe pain in his chest and of difﬁculty breathing. Vital signs
                                          include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 85/50 mm Hg during
                                          expiration and 60/palpable during inspiration, pulse rate of 120/min, respiratory rate
                                          of 20/min, and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. Physical examination shows a
                                          well-developed, well-nourished man with tattered and blood-stained clothing, and no
                                          evidence of other penetrating or blunt trauma including head trauma. His HEENT
                                          examination is unremarkable. His neck examination shows a jugular venous pressure
                                          of about 15 cm H2O; he has a midline trachea, no subcutaneous crepitus, and no
                                          obvious neck wounds. His chest is clear to auscultation and he has good breath sounds
                                          bilaterally. A 2-cm linear wound is present about 2 cm to the left of his sternum at the
                                          level of the nipple. His heart sounds are distant and tachycardic but have a regular
                                          rhythm. His abdominal, extremity, and neurologic examinations are unremarkable.
                                          X-ray of the chest shows clear lung ﬁelds, no pneumothorax, no pleural effusion, and a
                                          moderately enlarged heart.

              What conditions should be                 In an emergent setting, acute chest pain, hypotension, tachypnea, and
               included in the differential              tachycardia suggest acute aortic dissection, acute myocardial infarction,
               diagnosis?                                cardiac tamponade, and tension pneumothorax.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        In a 23-year-old man with no past medical history, a myocardial
                                                         infarction is unlikely. The absence of tracheal deviation and

CARDIOLOGY
                                                         radiographic evidence of pneumothorax in conjunction with
                                                         the presence of good breath sounds bilaterally makes a tension
                                                         pneumothorax very unlikely. Cardiac tamponade is more likely than
                                                         aortic dissection due to its classic physical ﬁndings of elevated jugular
                                                         venous pressure, distant heart sounds, and hypotension (Beck’s triad),
                                                         as well as pulsus paradoxus (decrease of systolic blood pressure by > 10
                                                         mm Hg during inspiration) and an enlarged heart on x-ray of the chest.
                                                         Kussmaul’s sign (failure of descent or a paradoxical increase of jugular
                                                         venous pressure on inspiration) may also be present.
              What tests and/or imaging tools           Trauma patients such as this one will often receive a focused abdominal
               should be used to conﬁrm the              sonogram for trauma (FAST), which includes ultrasonography of
               diagnosis?                                the heart and selected abdominal organs and spaces. ECG will show
                                                         globally decreased voltages indicating signal attenuation by pericardial
                                                         ﬂuid, and rarely, electrical alternans (beat-to-beat variability in QRS
                                                         complexes due to swinging of the heart in accumulated pericardial
                                                         ﬂuid). Chest x-ray ﬁlms are usually unremarkable in acute tamponade,
                                                         unless sufﬁcient ﬂuid has accumulated to enlarge the cardiac silhouette
                                                         (> 200 mL). Echocardiography is strongly recommended in all patients
                                                         with suspected pericardial disease. Two-dimensional echocardiographic
                                                         evidence of tamponade includes collapse of the right atrium, left atrium,
                                                         or the right ventricle during diastole, or failure of the inferior vena cava
                                                         to collapse with inspiration. On Doppler examination, ﬁlling patterns
                                                         across the mitral and tricuspid valve show increased respiratory variation.

             12
 What is the most appropriate    In hemodynamically unstable patients such as this one, urgent
  treatment for this condition?   removal of the pericardial ﬂuid by pericardiocentesis is indicated.
                                  In patients whose tamponade is due to hemorrhage from cardiac
                                  rupture (a possibility in this patient), emergent surgery is indicated,
                                  as well as aggressive medical stabilization of hemodynamics. Volume
                                  resuscitation must be considered, as tamponade pathophysiology is
                                  greatly worsened by hypovolemia.

                                                                                                             CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                        13
              CASE 9                     A 70-year-old man presents to the emergency department complaining of increased
                                          shortness of breath with minimal exercise, cough, and fatigue. These symptoms began
                                          2 weeks ago and have progressed gradually. He reports he used to feel this way “all
                                          the time” years ago but that this has not happened much since he began using his
                                          inhalers and his “water pill.” He also has a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary
                                          disease (COPD), congestive heart failure (CHF), coronary artery disease (CAD),
                                          diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and 30-pack-year of smoking. He denies swelling of
                                          the extremities, fever or chills, productive cough, chest pain, or palpitations. He cannot
                                          remember the names of his medications but says he has not missed any doses. When
                                          asked about his diet, he says he has been eating more hot soup since the weather has
                                          gotten colder. His temperature is 37.5°C (99.5°F), blood pressure is 135/90 mm Hg,
                                          heart rate is 90/min, respiratory rate is 18/min, and oxygen saturation is 94% on room
                                          air. Examination of the neck reveals mild jugular venous distention. Examination of the
                                          lungs reveals loud crackles throughout the lung ﬁelds bilaterally. Examination of the
                                          heart reveals a laterally displaced point of maximum impulse with no murmurs, rubs,
                                          or gallops. There is mild clubbing of the extremities, as well as pitting edema of the
                                          lower extremities to the knee, bilaterally. His plasma brain natriuretic peptide level on
                                          rapid bedside assay is 500 pg/mL, and an x-ray of the chest reveals perivascular haziness,
                                          interstitial edema, and an enlarged cardiac silhouette.

              What conditions should be                CAD, COPD, and CHF each may present with dyspnea on exertion
               included in the differential             and fatigue. It is of primary importance to distinguish between them
               diagnosis?                               when evaluating the presenting symptoms. Etiologies of gradually
                                                        worsening shortness of breath and fatigue can include both cardiac and

CARDIOLOGY
                                                        pulmonary diseases, including the following:
                                                         Anemia.
                                                         Heart failure secondary to ischemia/infarction, dysrhythmia, valvular
                                                          dysfunction, infection, or volume overload.
                                                         Lung infections (pneumonia, bronchitis, bronchiectasis).
                                                         Mechanical impairment of ventilation.
                                                         Pulmonary edema.
                                                         Pulmonary embolism.
                                                         Sepsis.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       CHF exacerbation leading to pulmonary edema. This patient’s
                                                        dyspnea, jugular venous distension, and tachypnea in the presence of
                                                        crackles, pulmonary edema, elevated brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
                                                        level, and cardiomegaly suggest an acute exacerbation of CHF. An
                                                        exacerbation of COPD is unlikely given that this patient does not
                                                        have fever, productive cough, or wheezing. Additionally, the patient
                                                        reported increasing intake of soup, a particularly salty food, which
                                                        can signiﬁcantly increase water retention, thereby worsening CHF. A
                                                        mnemonic for the causes of recurrent CHF is FAILURE:
                                                        Forgot medication
                                                        Arrhythmia/anemia
                                                        Ischemia/infarct/infection
                                                        Lifestyle (increased sodium intake, decreased exercise); most common
                                                           cause
                                                        Upregulation (increased cardiac output due to pregnancy,
                                                           hyperthyroidism, etc.)
                                                        Renal failure
                                                        Embolus (pulmonary)

             14
 How is this condition classiﬁed?                 The American College of Cardiologists and American Heart
                                                   Association developed guidelines in 2001 for the classiﬁcation and
                                                   treatment of CHF (see Table 1-1).
 What are the typical laboratory                  In addition to an x-ray of the chest that may show pulmonary edema,
  and imaging ﬁndings in this                      patients with CHF exacerbations may have the following:
  condition?                                        Decreased hematocrit (anemia may exacerbate CHF).
                                                    Increased potassium, creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen levels
                                                     (renal failure may exacerbate CHF).
                                                    Increased plasma BNP level, which is usually elevated in CHF
                                                     exacerbations.
                                                    A chest radiograph showing cardiomegaly, cephalization of
                                                     pulmonary vessels, and/or pleural effusion.
                                                    ECG changes showing left ventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmias, or
                                                     ischemia or low-voltage or old infarcts (in fact, a normal ECG makes
                                                     systolic dysfunction highly unlikely).
                                                    ECG showing abnormal ventricular size (dilated, hypertrophic, or
                                                     restrictive cardiomyopathy) or function (systolic or diastolic).
 What is the most appropriate                     This patient appears to have stage C heart failure as deﬁned by
  treatment for this patient?                      Table 1-1. His physical exam and x-ray of the chest show evidence of
                                                   myocardial hypertrophy, and he is having recurrent symptoms. He
                                                   should be admitted to the hospital for a trial of intravenous diuresis
                                                   (which often succeeds when oral diuretics fail). An echocardiogram
                                                   should be obtained to evaluate for left ventricular structural
                                                   abnormalities as well as determine an ejection fraction. He should

                                                                                                                                    CARDIOLOGY
                                                   be prescribed an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker
                                                   (given his atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus), a
                                                   diuretic (given his evidence of ﬂuid retention), and digitalis (if his
                                                   ejection fraction is less than 25%, as this has been shown to reduce
                                                   hospitalization). He should also receive frequent blood pressure and
                                                   weight monitoring, exercise counseling, and possibly an aldosterone
                                                   antagonist (depending on his ejection fraction). In addition, he should
                                                   take aspirin and a statin for his CAD.

TA B L E 1- 1 .   Stages of Congestive Heart Failure

 STAGE      DESCRIPTION                                                  TREATMENT

 A          Patient is high risk for developing CHF (hypertension,       Manage hypertension, smoking, obesity, exercise,
            CAD, diabetes mellitus, or family history), but has no       hyperlipidemia, alcohol use. Use angiotensin-converting
            evident signs or symptoms.                                   enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in patients with diabetes,
                                                                         hypertension, atherosclerosis.

 B          Patient has structural heart disease but has never had       ACE inhibitors, β-blockers.
            symptoms of CHF.

 C          Patient has structural heart disease with prior or current   Diuretics, ACE inhibitors, β-blockers, dietary salt
            symptoms of CHF.                                             restriction, digitalis.

 D          Patient has marked symptoms of CHF at rest despite           Mechanical assist devices, transplant, intravenous
            maximal therapy.                                             inotropes, hospice care.

                                                                                                                               15
              CASE 10                    An 85-year-old woman who underwent colon cancer surgery 2 months ago is brought to
                                          the clinic by her daughter because she has been complaining of painful swelling of her
                                          left leg. The patient says she has been feeling otherwise well except for a 2-week history
                                          of pain, swelling, and redness in her upper left calf. She denies any history of similar
                                          problems in the past and denies acute or repetitive trauma to the area; she says that,
                                          in fact, she has been avoiding exercise or walking unnecessarily since her surgery. She
                                          denies any other medical or surgical history and takes atenolol and aspirin daily. Vital
                                          signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 135/90 mm Hg, pulse
                                          rate of 60/min, and respiratory rate of 12/min. Her physical examination demonstrates
                                          no jugular venous distention; clear lung ﬁelds; a regular heart rate and rhythm without
                                          murmurs, rubs, or gallops; and a normal abdomen. Her left calf has pitting edema and
                                          is approximately 4 cm larger in circumference than the right calf. It is erythematous
                                          on the posterior aspect and tender to palpation. Neurologic and skin examinations are
                                          otherwise unremarkable.

              What conditions should be                 The differential diagnosis of pain and swelling in a lower extremity
               included in the differential              includes cellulitis, deep venous thrombosis, knee injury, lymphangitis
               diagnosis?                                or lymph obstruction, muscle strain or tear, popliteal (Baker’s) cyst,
                                                         superﬁcial thrombophlebitis, and venous insufﬁciency.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        Given the clinical presentation, deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is the
                                                         most likely diagnosis.
              What other risk factors are               In addition to hereditary thrombophilia (factor V Leiden, protein
               associated with an increased              C and S deﬁciency, antithrombin III deﬁciency, prothrombin gene

CARDIOLOGY
               incidence of this condition?              mutation, etc.), many acquired DVT risk factors have been identiﬁed
                                                         and include antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, congestive heart
                                                         failure, hormone replacement therapy, hyperhomocysteinemia,
                                                         hyperviscosity, immobilization, inﬂammatory bowel disease,
                                                         leukocytosis, malignancy, myeloproliferative disorders, nephrotic
                                                         syndrome, oral contraceptives, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria,
                                                         pregnancy, presence of a central venous catheter, sickle cell anemia,
                                                         surgery (especially orthopedic), tamoxifen, and trauma.
              What tests and/or imaging tools           Compression ultrasonography is the ﬁrst-line test for patients with
               could be used to conﬁrm the               a suspected DVT, with a positive predictive value of 94%. The gold
               diagnosis?                                standard test for diagnosing DVT is contrast venography, but it is too
                                                         invasive to use on a regular basis. Impedance plethysmography is a
                                                         noninvasive alternative and is used primarily in cases of recurrent
                                                         DVT. A D-dimer assay is often used clinically to help rule out DVT, as
                                                         it has very high sensitivity. Magnetic resonance venography has high
                                                         sensitivity and speciﬁcity, but cost and availability prevent its regular
                                                         use.

             16
 What is the most appropriate           IV unfractionated heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin (enoxaparin),
  treatment for this patient after the   or adjusted-dose IV heparin for at least 5 days.
  diagnosis is conﬁrmed?
                                         Warfarin can usually be started in conjunction with heparin, once the
                                         PTT is therapeutic for 24 hours. Warfarin should be continued for
                                         3–6 months in patients with non-time-limiting proximate causes (e.g.,
                                         cancer, thrombophilia) or for a longer duration for recurrent DVT.
                                         Heparin should be discontinued when the patient’s International
                                         Normalized Ratio (INR) has been therapeutic on warfarin for
                                         2 consecutive days.
                                         An inferior vena caval ﬁlter is indicated if there is a contraindication to,
                                         complication of, or failure of oral anticoagulation therapy in patients
                                         with (or at high risk of) proximal vein thrombosis or pulmonary
                                         embolism.

                                                                                                                        CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                                  17
              CASE 11                   A 46-year-old man with a history of chronic alcohol abuse presents to the clinic with
                                         a chief complaint of swelling in his feet and lower legs. He says the swelling started
                                         within the past year and has been persistent despite elevating his feet at night. He denies
                                         any signiﬁcant medical history, takes no medications, and does not use tobacco. He
                                         reports 20 years of drinking six to eight beers daily and reports that he has tried to “cut
                                         down” his alcohol intake recently, but still drinks approximately four beers per night.
                                         On further questioning, he reveals that he has been feeling more fatigued than normal,
                                         and says he cannot walk as far as he used to without getting short of breath. Vital signs
                                         include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 125/70 mm Hg, pulse
                                         rate of 80/min, and respiratory rate of 14/min. Physical examination reveals distended
                                         jugular veins. His chest exam is clear, and his heart has a regular rate and rhythm with
                                         no murmurs or gallops. He has normal bowel sounds but has a protuberant abdomen
                                         with shifting dullness and a ﬂuid wave. He has pitting edema to mid-calf bilaterally with
                                         good distal pulses. An x-ray of the chest is shown in Figure 1-3.

CARDIOLOGY

                                         FIGURE 1-3.         (Reproduced, with permission, from Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski
                                         JS, Ma OJ, Cline DM. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine, 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                         2004: Fig. 61-3.)

              What conditions should be                 This patient is exhibiting symptoms and signs of excess interstitial
              included in the differential               ﬂuid accumulation: shortness of breath, ascites, and peripheral edema.
              diagnosis?                                 The differential diagnosis should thus focus on disease states known to
                                                         cause subacute or chronic ﬂuid accumulation:
                                                          Congestive heart failure (dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic
                                                           cardiomyopathy, restrictive cardiomyopathy, valvular heart disease,
                                                           high-output failure).
                                                          Liver disease.
                                                          Lymphatic obstruction.
                                                          Nephrotic syndrome or sodium retention.
                                                          Venous insufﬁciency.

             18
 What is the most likely diagnosis?   This patient satisﬁes the requirements for alcoholic cardiomyopathy
                                       on history, physical exam, and chest x-ray: congestive heart failure,
                                       cardiomegaly (see Figure 1-3), and a history of heavy and prolonged
                                       alcohol intake. Alcoholic cardiomyopathy is caused by a direct, toxic
                                       effect of alcohol on the myocardium and is perpetuated by deﬁciencies
                                       that often accompany long-term alcoholism such as thiamine (wet
                                       beriberi), hypomagnesemia, and hypokalemia. It is the leading cause of
                                       secondary, nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy in the United States.
 What other symptoms are              Patients with alcoholic cardiomyopathy often display symptoms
  common in patients with this         and signs common to heart failure of any cause, such as dyspnea,
  condition?                           orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, palpitations, angina or chest
                                       discomfort, syncope, fatigue, weakness, decreased exercise tolerance,
                                       anorexia, and/or nausea. In addition, signs of chronic liver disease
                                       such as jaundice, spider angiomata, and hepatomegaly should also be
                                       sought out.
 What is the most appropriate         Echocardiography will conﬁrm the diagnosis and deﬁne the extent
  treatment for this patient?          of disease. Alcoholic cardiomyopathy will appear as a four-chamber
                                       dilatation, with thin-walled ventricles, decreased ejection fraction, and
                                       absence of wall motion abnormalities.
                                       Abstinence from alcohol is associated with a favorable course of the
                                       cardiomyopathy, and may help prevent ﬁbrosis of the myocardium.
                                       Salt restriction and loop diuretics are mainstays of treatment for the
                                       acute congestive phase of heart failure from any cause.

                                                                                                                     CARDIOLOGY
                                       ACE inhibitors, β-blockers (when euvolemic), and digoxin should be
                                       prescribed as indicated for control of blood pressure and prevention of
                                       myocardial remodeling.
                                       Any nutritional deﬁciencies (e.g., hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia)
                                       should be corrected.

                                                                                                                19
              CASE 12                    An 80-year-old woman with a history of chronic hypertension presents to the clinic
                                          for a routine examination. She notes that over the past couple of years she has had
                                          progressive mild shortness of breath on exertion and in the middle of the night, as well
                                          as mild foot swelling. She denies cough, chest pain, palpitations, light-headedness, or
                                          fatigue. She denies that it is very bothersome but would like to know if it is dangerous
                                          to her health. She has never been hospitalized, and denies any signiﬁcant medical
                                          history other than high blood pressure, although she admits to being poorly adherent to
                                          her medications. She denies a smoking history and family history of similar problems.
                                          Vital signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 170/110 mm
                                          Hg, pulse rate of 80/min, and respiratory rate of 18/min. Physical examination reveals a
                                          lack of jugular venous distention and a laterally displaced point of maximum impulse,
                                          with no murmurs, rubs, or gallops, a clear lung exam, and 2+ pitting edema to midleg
                                          bilaterally. An ECG shows left atrial enlargement and left ventricular hypertrophy with
                                          repolarization abnormalities. Echocardiography shows an ejection fraction of 65% and
                                          a thickened left ventricular wall.

              What conditions should be                 In this patient with subacute symptoms and signs suggestive of heart
               included in the differential              failure (dyspnea on exertion, peripheral edema, paroxysmal nocturnal
               diagnosis?                                dyspnea) the differential includes congestive heart failure, lung disease,
                                                         atrial ﬁbrillation, and ischemic heart disease.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        Clinical heart failure in the setting of chronic hypertension and
                                                         echocardiographic evidence of normal systolic function and thickened
                                                         myocardium indicate that diastolic dysfunction is the likely cause of

CARDIOLOGY
                                                         symptoms. However, the speciﬁc cause of her heart failure is likely
                                                         chronic hypertensive cardiac left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. Other
                                                         common causes of diastolic dysfunction include amyloidosis,
                                                         diabetes, constrictive pericarditis, hemochromatosis, coronary artery
                                                         disease, sarcoidosis, severe aortic regurgitation, and severe mitral
                                                         regurgitation.
              What other tests should be                Many patients with symptoms and signs of heart failure also give a
               considered for this patient?              history of angina or ischemic heart disease. These patients should
                                                         undergo either stress testing or cardiac catheterization. Catheterization
                                                         can help determine the presence and extent of coronary disease
                                                         as well as measure ventricular and atrial pressure dynamics. Stress
                                                         echocardiography can illustrate chamber size, motion, and response to
                                                         exercise, thus aiding in the diagnosis of coronary disease and diastolic
                                                         dysfunction.
              What is the most appropriate              The general principles of treatment in diastolic dysfunction are
               treatment for this condition?             to control hypertension, control any arrhythmia, control edema
                                                         (pulmonary and peripheral), and stabilize any underlying coronary
                                                         artery disease. Diuretics can reduce both blood pressure and edema;
                                                         however, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, calcium
                                                         channel blockers, and β-blockers are often required to fully control the
                                                         patient’s hypertension. Atrial ﬁbrillation is controlled as in the general
                                                         population, although a greater emphasis is placed on rhythm control
                                                         to restore the atrial diastolic “kick.” Finally, any coronary heart disease
                                                         should be fully evaluated and treated.

             20
 CASE 13                      A 72-year-old man with a history of peripheral vascular disease presents to the clinic
                               complaining of having shortness of breath for the past month. He had previously been
                               able to climb two ﬂights of steps with little difﬁculty, but now cannot climb one ﬂight
                               without severe shortness of breath. On further questioning, he reports occasional chest
                               pain on heavy exertion, and says 1 week earlier he fainted after climbing the stairs from
                               his basement. He denies a history of heart or lung problems, high cholesterol, diabetes,
                               smoking, or family history of heart or lung disease. On physical examination, he appears
                               in no acute distress, and his vital signs include a temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F),
                               blood pressure of 140/80 mm Hg, pulse rate of 80/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, and
                               oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. There is a slow rise of the carotid upstroke, a
                               sustained apical impulse, and a quiet S2, as well as a 3/6 harsh systolic ejection murmur
                               heard best at the second intercostal space at the right sternal border.

 What is the pathophysiology of              Unlike aortic regurgitation, which leads to left ventricular volume
  volume shifts in this condition?            overload and compensatory chamber enlargement, AS leads to left
                                              ventricular pressure overload and compensatory left ventricular
                                              concentric hypertrophy; this adaptation maintains normal wall stress
                                              and cardiac output in the face of increased systolic pressure from the
                                              stenotic valve. As the disease progresses and the valve further narrows,
                                              the left ventricle becomes less compliant, and diastolic dysfunction
                                              can develop, which can lead to symptoms as well as eventual systolic
                                              dysfunction. Shortness of breath occurs due to increased ﬁlling
                                              pressures during exercise as well as failure of cardiac output to meet the
                                              body’s demands. Angina in AS can occur due to underlying coronary

                                                                                                                           CARDIOLOGY
                                              disease (50% of patients with AS), increased myocardial oxygen
                                              demand due to increased left ventricular mass, or decreased oxygen
                                              supply due to compression of intramyocardial coronary arteries during
                                              prolonged systolic contraction, impaired diastolic relaxation (especially
                                              during tachycardia), and reduced coronary ﬂow reserve.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?          In a patient with the classic triad of dyspnea on exertion, angina,
                                              and syncope, aortic stenosis (AS) is the ﬁrst disease that should come
                                              to mind. Of course, each of these symptoms has its own differential
                                              diagnosis, but the presence of all three suggests AS. The physical exam
                                              ﬁndings of a delayed carotid upstroke, a sustained apical impulse, and
                                              a systolic murmur further support the diagnosis.
 What are the next steps in                  In patients with suspected AS, an echocardiogram is an essential
  management?                                 diagnostic tool that can assess the degree of valvular stenosis and the
                                              peak and mean gradients across the valve, which can help calculate the
                                              valve area. Patients with symptomatic AS or a critical valve area < 0.8
                                              cm2 should be referred to a cardiac surgeon for valve replacement, as
                                              mortality from AS after symptoms have appeared is approximately 90%
                                              within 3 years without valve replacement
 What is the main surgical                   The primary consideration is which type of valve to use: mechanical or
  consideration, and how does it              bioprosthetic. Mechanical valves, in general, result in better outcomes;
  affect long-term treatment?                 they are preferred in patients with expected long life spans, those with
                                              a preexisting mechanical valve in a different location, those already
                                              requiring warfarin therapy due to thromboembolism risk factors, and
                                              those < 65 years old. A bioprosthetic valve, however, is preferred in
                                              patients who cannot or will not take warfarin and those > 65 years old
                                              who have no thromboembolic risk factors.

                                                                                                                     21
              CASE 14                    A 40-year-old man with a history of hypertension presents to the clinic for his annual
                                          checkup. He denies recent complaints, and his history and physical examination
                                          are unremarkable except for a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg. He currently takes
                                          hydrochlorothiazide for his hypertension. He is found to have a total serum cholesterol
                                          of 250 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol of 200 mg/dL, and high-
                                          density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol of 50 mg/dL on a routine fasting lipid proﬁle. He
                                          has no family history of coronary artery disease and does not smoke.

              What is the epidemiology of this         Hypercholesterolemia is one major modiﬁable risk factor for coronary
               condition?                               artery disease, which is associated with approximately one-half of all
                                                        deaths in men and women over age 65. Hypercholesterolemia is a
                                                        subset of “dyslipidemia,” which can be deﬁned as a total cholesterol,
                                                        LDL cholesterol, triglyceride, apo-B, or Lp(a) concentrations above
                                                        the ninetieth percentile, or HDL cholesterol or apo A-1 concentrations
                                                        below the tenth percentile of the general population.
                                                        Hypercholesterolemia can be deﬁned as a serum total cholesterol
                                                        > 200 mg/dL on two separate occasions, an LDL cholesterol
                                                        > 130 mg/dL, or an HDL cholesterol < 30 mg/dL. The prevalence
                                                        of dyslipidemia is as high as 80% in individuals with “premature”
                                                        coronary artery disease (occurring before age 55 in men and before age
                                                        65 in women), compared with up to 48% of age-matched controls. All
                                                        patients > 20 years old should have a fasting lipid proﬁle conducted
                                                        every 5 years.

CARDIOLOGY
              What are the secondary causes of          Alcoholism
               this condition?                           Cushing’s disease
                                                         Diabetes mellitus
                                                         Diuretic use
                                                         Familial hypercholesterolemia
                                                         Hepatic disease
                                                         Hypothyroidism
                                                         Obesity
                                                         OCP use
                                                         Nephrotic syndrome

              What physical signs may be found         Xanthomas (eruptive nodules in skin over tendons), xanthelasmas
               in patients with severe forms of         (yellow fatty deposits in skin around eyes), and lipemia retinalis
               this condition?                          (creamy appearance of retinal vessels) are physical manifestations of
                                                        severely increased LDL cholesterol or triglycerides.
              What is the most appropriate             Management of hypercholesterolemia is based on the stratiﬁcation of
               management for this patient to           the patient’s risk for coronary artery disease; these risk factors include:
               reduce his risk of morbidity and/         Smoking
               or mortality?                             Hypertension (on treatment, or > 140/90 mm Hg)
                                                         HDL cholesterol < 40 mg/dL
                                                         Family history of “premature” coronary artery disease in ﬁrst-degree
                                                          relatives
                                                         Age > 45 in men or > 55 in women

                                                        HDL cholesterol > 60 mg/dL removes one point from the tally of risk
                                                        factors. This patient has only one risk factor (hypertension), making
                                                        his LDL cholesterol goal < 160 mg/dL. Because his current LDL
                                                        cholesterol is 200 mg/dL, he is a candidate for both lifestyle change and
                                                        lipid-lowering medication therapy, for example, statins.

             22
 CASE 15                       A 35-year-old black man with no signiﬁcant past medical history presents to the
                                outpatient clinic for a follow-up examination 4 weeks after he was noted to have a blood
                                pressure of 150/80 mm Hg on a routine health maintenance examination. He has no
                                complaints, takes no medications, and does not smoke or use alcohol or other drugs.
                                His family history is signiﬁcant for a father with high blood pressure and a maternal
                                grandmother who died of breast cancer. His blood pressure on this visit is 150/90
                                mm Hg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?          Primary (essential) hypertension. Hypertension is deﬁned as a systolic
                                              blood pressure > 140 mm Hg or a diastolic blood pressure > 90 mm Hg
                                              on three separate measurements at least 2 weeks apart. Although this
                                              patient has only had two measurements, it is likely that he will have a
                                              third that satisﬁes the criteria for diagnosing hypertension. Although
                                              primary hypertension is technically idiopathic, and therefore a
                                              diagnosis of exclusion, it represents 95% of all cases of hypertension.
                                              Thus, it is reasonable for physicians to begin therapy for primary
                                              hypertension without undertaking a full workup for causes of secondary
                                              hypertension, especially if there is a family history of hypertension.

 What risk factors are associated             Family history of hypertension or heart disease
  with an increased incidence of               High-sodium diet
  this condition?                              Obesity
                                               Older age
                                               Race (blacks > whites)

                                                                                                                           CARDIOLOGY
                                               Smoking

 What are common complications               Because hypertension is asymptomatic until complications develop,
  associated this condition?                  patients who do not receive regular medical care may develop
                                              the sequelae of untreated hypertension. Speciﬁcally, untreated
                                              hypertension leads to end-organ damage:
                                               Heart—hypertrophy, myocardial infarction, CHF
                                               Brain—stroke, TIA
                                               Kidney—chronic kidney disease, renal failure
                                               Vasculature—peripheral vascular disease
                                               Eye—retinopathy

 What is the most appropriate                The patient should return in 4–6 weeks for a third blood pressure
  treatment for this patient?                 measurement. If it is elevated, therapy is indicated.
                                              First-line therapy is lifestyle change, speciﬁcally weight reduction (to
                                              a BMI between 18 and 25 kg/m2), dietary change (begin a diet rich in
                                              fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy products), and sodium restriction,
                                              along with regular aerobic physical activity, moderation of alcohol
                                              consumption, and cessation of tobacco use. If lifestyle modiﬁcation is
                                              inadequate, thiazide diuretics are inexpensive and effective ﬁrst-line
                                              therapy for otherwise healthy patients.
                                               Population-speciﬁc approaches:
                                                  ACE inhibitor: diabetes, heart failure, post-STEMI, LV
                                                   dysfunction.
                                                  β-blockers: post-MI, stable patients with heart failure.
                                                  α-blockers: benign prostatic hyperplasia.

                                              Periodic surveillance tests of end-organ involvement (ECG and
                                              serum BUN/Cr) should be conducted, as well as periodic electrolyte
                                              monitoring of those on diuretics.

                                                                                                                     23
              CASE 16                   A 60-year-old white man with a history of coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular
                                         disease status post-femoral artery–posterior tibial artery bypass grafting, osteoarthritis,
                                         and a 3-year history of hypertension presents to the clinic for a routine blood pressure
                                         check. He has had no complaints since his last checkup 6 months ago. He is taking
                                         hydrochlorothiazide, metoprolol, lisinopril, diltiazem, pravastatin, and aspirin. Vital
                                         signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 160/95 mm Hg, pulse
                                         rate of 70/min, and respiratory rate of 10/min. His physical examination is notable for
                                         an abdominal bruit auscultated to the right of midline at the level of the umbilicus.
                                         Laboratory values are as follows:
                                         Sodium: 140 mEq/L
                                         Potassium: 4.1 mEq/L
                                         Chloride: 98 mEq/L
                                         Bicarbonate: 23 mEq/L
                                         BUN: 22 mg/dL
                                         Creatinine: 1.8 mg/dL
                                         Glucose: 110 mg/dL
                                         A magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) is ordered, and shown in Figure 1-4.

CARDIOLOGY

                                         FIGURE 1-4.      (Reprinted, with permission, from Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billar TR,
                                         Dunn DL, Hunter JG, Matthews JB, Pollock RE, Schwartz SI. Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery,
                                         8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 22-83.)

              What conditions should be                In a patient > 50 years old with recent-onset hypertension, it is
              included in the differential              important to look for secondary causes of hypertension, especially if
              diagnosis?                                the high blood pressure is refractory to standard medical therapy (as
                                                        in this patient) or uncontrolled after a period of being controlled.
                                                        It is also important to determine if the patient is adhering to his or
                                                        her medication regimen. The most common causes of secondary
                                                        hypertension can be remembered by the mnemonic CHAPS:
                                                        Cushing’s syndrome
                                                        Hyperaldosteronism
                                                        Aortic coarctation
                                                        Pheochromocytoma
                                                        Stenosis (renal artery)

             24
 What is the most likely diagnosis?   In this patient with widespread atherosclerotic disease (coronaries,
                                       peripheral vasculature), recent-onset and refractory hypertension, a
                                       high serum creatinine, and a magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA)
                                       showing bilateral stenosis of the renal arteries (see Figure 1-4), renal
                                       artery stenosis is the most likely diagnosis.
 What are the most common             The two most common causes of renal artery stenosis are ﬁbromuscular
  causes of this condition?            dysplasia (in female patients < 25) and atherosclerotic disease (in
                                       patients > 50).

 What is the most appropriate         Therapy is generally recommended for patients with > 75% stenosis
  treatment for this condition?        bilaterally. The recommended treatment in patients with hypertension
                                       refractory to medical therapy is percutaneous angioplasty with
                                       stenting. Open surgery is an alternative if angioplasty fails or there
                                       is a concomitant need for aortic surgery. In addition, all patients
                                       with atherosclerosis should be treated for this systemic disease,
                                       including coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, and
                                       stroke prevention. Aggressive lipid management, with goals of LDL
                                       cholesterol of < 100 mg/dL, possibly even 70 mg/dL, should be
                                       considered.

                                                                                                                       CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                                  25
              CASE 17                    A 17-year-old cross-country runner presents to his primary care physician complaining
                                          of occasional chest pain (CP) and light-headedness during meets. He says that when
                                          he gets out of breath, he feels like he might pass out and his chest feels “tight.” After a
                                          thorough examination, the physician assures him that everything is okay but tells him
                                          that he should stay well hydrated and be careful not to run too hard in the heat. That
                                          afternoon, the patient returns to school and, after climbing stairs to reach his classroom,
                                          loses consciousness and falls to the ﬂoor. He quickly regains consciousness but is taken
                                          to the emergency room.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) is characterized
                                                         by thickening of the septal myocardium below the aortic valve.
                                                         This is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in
                                                         individuals < 30 years old. Symptoms include chest pain, dyspnea
                                                         (most common), syncope, palpitations, and sudden death.

              What is an ECG likely to show?            Up to 30% of asymptomatic patients have a normal ECG, but a normal
                                                         ECG is very uncommon in symptomatic patients and is likely to show
                                                         left axis deviation, tall R waves with widening of QRS, prominent Q
                                                         waves in interior and lateral leads.
              What is the next step in                  Echocardiography is the test of choice. All patients should undergo
               diagnosis?                                Holter monitoring and stress testing. Those with chest pain or dyspnea
                                                         should be evaluated for inducible ﬂow obstruction using Valsalva or
                                                         amyl nitrate. Patients with severe symptoms should undergo cardiac
                                                         catheterization.

CARDIOLOGY
              Should this patient’s relatives be        HOCM is autosomal dominant, and all ﬁrst-degree relatives > 12 years
               screened for this condition?              old should automatically undergo screening. Children < 12 years
                                                         should be screened if they are symptomatic or considered high risk.
              What is the most appropriate               Competitive sports, strenuous exercise, and dehydration should be
               management for this condition?              avoided.
                                                          Asymptomatic patients should not be treated medically.
                                                          Patients with a history of chest pain or syncope:
                                                            β-blockers resolve CP and syncope in one-third of patients; no
                                                             reduction in risk of SCD.
                                                            Amiodarone reduces risk of SVT and life-threatening ventricular
                                                             arrhythmias; may reduce risk of SCD.
                                                            Nondihydropiridine calcium channel blockers may improve LV
                                                              compliance and pressure gradients, reducing diastolic pressures
                                                              and improving exercise tolerance.
                                                            Disopyramide may be used if patients do not respond to β-blockers
                                                              and calcium channel blockers.
                                                          Severely affected patients with large pressure gradients who have
                                                           failed medical therapy:
                                                            Surgical myotomy of intraventricular septum—symptomatic relief
                                                              in 75% patients.
              What ﬁve risk factors confer               Family history of SCD
               increased risk for SCD when                Syncope
               present with this condition?               Nonsustained ventricular ﬁbrillation
                                                          Hypotension in response to exercise
                                                          LV hypertrophy > 3 cm

             26
 Should all patients have an ICD   No. According to American Heart Association guidelines, the
  placed for prevention of SCD?     following groups should have ICD placed:
                                     History of single episode of SCD.
                                     High-risk patients: two or more of the ﬁve major risk factors.
                                     End-stage HOCM with LV dysfunction, thinning, and
                                      chamber dilation.
                                     Single SCD risk factor: individualized decision process.

                                                                                                            CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                       27
              CASE 18                   A 77-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by his daughter after
                                         he developed weakness in his right upper extremity. She says that he has been sick
                                         for the past two weeks with fever, chills, and night sweats and that he has lost nearly
                                         4.5 kg (10 lb) during that time. He had attributed these symptoms to the ﬂu, but he
                                         could not move his left arm when he woke this morning. He denies other symptoms.
                                         On further questioning, his general health is good except for poorly controlled
                                         hypertension, and he underwent an aortic valve replacement 2 months ago. Physical
                                         examination is remarkable for upper left hemiplegia, the click of his prosthetic valve,
                                         and the image below on funduscopic exam. Vital signs include a temperature of
                                         38.9°C (102.0 °F), blood pressure of 114/55 mm Hg, and pulse of 115/min.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?      Given the patient’s history and physical ﬁndings, the most likely
                                                       diagnosis is infective endocarditis (IE).

              What tests and/or imaging tools         This diagnosis should be made by:
               could be used to conﬁrm the              Three blood cultures separated by at least 1 hour from different
               diagnosis?                                venipuncture sites.
                                                          Stable patients and those who have received prior antibiotics
                                                           should not be treated empirically.
                                                          Unstable patients should receive empiric treatment once these
                                                           cultures are obtained.
                                                        Echocardiography should be done in all patients with moderate
                                                         suspicion of IE.
                                                          TTE should be attempted ﬁrst in most cases. TEE should be used

CARDIOLOGY
                                                           if TTE is nondiagnostic.
                                                        ECG baseline should be obtained.
                                                        Antibiotic treatment is organism speciﬁc and usually lasts 4–6 weeks
                                                         for native valves and at least 6 weeks for prosthetic valves.
              What are the Duke criteria?             These criteria are widely used to make the clinical diagnosis of IE. IE
                                                       is considered present for (1) two major criteria, (2) one major and three
                                                       minor criteria, or (3) ﬁve minor criteria.
                                                        Major criteria:
                                                           Positive blood cultures × 2 for typical IE organisms.
                                                           Echocardiography: oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or
                                                            supporting structures, in the path of regurgitant jets, or on
                                                            implanted material in the absence of an alternative anatomic
                                                            explanation, or abscess, or new partial dehiscence of prosthetic
                                                            valve or new valvular regurgitation.
                                                        Minor criteria:
                                                           Predisposing heart condition or IV drug use.
                                                           Temp > 38.0 °C (100.4 °F).
                                                           Vascular phenomena: arterial emboli, mycotic aneurysm,
                                                            intracranial bleed, Janeway lesions.
                                                           Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Roth’s spots,
                                                            Osler’s nodes.
                                                           Positive blood culture not meeting major criteria speciﬁcs.
                                                           Echocardiographic ﬁndings not meeting major criteria speciﬁcs.

             28
 What are the indications for     Refractory CHF caused by new/worsening valve dysfunction.
  prompt surgical intervention?    Prosthetic valves—approximately 40% require surgery.
                                   Perivalvular infection.
                                   Uncontrolled infection.
                                   Staphylococcus aureus.
                                     Nearly all prosthetic valves should be operative.
                                     Native aortic or mitral valve with TTE evident vegetations and
                                      remain septic during initial week of therapy.

                                                                                                            CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                       29
              CASE 19                   A 60-year-old man is brought to the emergency department with severe chest pain.
                                         He says it began about an hour ago while he was climbing stairs and has persisted,
                                         despite resting. He describes it as “tightness” in the center of his chest. He has been
                                         short of breath, nauseated, and sweating since the pain began. On questioning, he
                                         reports a history of similar pain brought on by exertion, but it usually resolves with
                                         rest. He also has a history of diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, and a 30-pack-year
                                         smoking history. His father and cousin both died of heart attacks in their seventies. He
                                         takes metformin, hydrochlorothiazide, and a multivitamin. Vital signs include a
                                         temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg, pulse rate of
                                         100/min, respiratory rate of 15/min, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air.
                                         Results of physical examination are unremarkable. X-ray of the chest reveals clear
                                         lungs with a normal-sized heart and mediastinum. An ECG is shown in Figure 1-5.

CARDIOLOGY

                                         FIGURE 1-5.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Fuster V, Alexander RW, O’Rourke RA,
                                         eds.; Roberts R, King SB III, Nash IS, Prystowsky EN, assoc. eds. Hurst’s The Heart, 11th ed.
                                         New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 53.1.)

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        In this patient with “tight” chest pain, diabetes, a history of angina,
                                                         a family history of heart disease, and an ECG showing ST-segment
                                                         elevation in leads V1–V3, aVL, and aVR (see Figure 1-5), the most
                                                         likely diagnosis is an acute anterior wall myocardial infarction (MI).
                                                         Note the “reciprocal” ST-segment depression in leads V5–V6, II, III,
                                                         and aVF, which occurs frequently in transmural infarction.

             30
 What is the most appropriate                   First steps include morphine, oxygen, nitrates, aspirin (MONA),
  acute treatment for this                       heparin/LMWH and β-blockers (unless hemodynamically
  condition?                                     compromised). Patients with chest pain < 12 hours’ duration, ECG
                                                 evidence of ST elevation in contiguous leads, and a history consistent
                                                 with an acute coronary syndrome, with or without serum biomarkers
                                                 of MI, should be triaged to either primary percutaneous coronary
                                                 intervention (PCI) or thrombolytic therapy to establish reperfusion of
                                                 the myocardium as quickly as possible.
                                                  PCI is preferred over lytic therapy if the “door-to-balloon” time is <
                                                   90 minutes. A glycoprotein IIb/IIIA inhibitor and clopidogrel should
                                                   be given.
                                                  Coronary artery bypass grafting after acute MI is reserved for
                                                   patients with refractory ischemia, triple-vessel or left main
                                                   artery disease, cardiogenic shock, complications of PCI or
                                                   mechanical complications of the MI, or if the patient has absolute
                                                   contraindications to PCI or thrombolysis.
                                                 Also, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia should be treated to prevent
                                                 arrhythmic complications. This patient, and all diabetic patients, will
                                                 also beneﬁt from tight glycemic control in both the acute ischemic
                                                 period as well as the long term.
 What are the complications                     The most clinically signiﬁcant complications of an acute MI include
  associated with this condition?                mechanical complications and arrhythmic complications. Mechanical
                                                 complications, their diagnosis, and management are noted in Table
                                                 1-2.

TA B L E 1- 2 .   Diagnosis and Management of Mechanical Complications in Acute MI
                                                                                                                                 CARDIOLOGY
 COMPLICATION (Most Occur
 Within 5 Days)                  DIAGNOSIS                                      MANAGEMENT

 Left ventricular free wall      Severe right heart failure/shock/death (full   ECG and echocardiogram, followed by
 rupture                         rupture with cardiac tamponade) or recurrent   pericardiocentesis. If aspirated ﬂuid is
                                 chest pain, nausea, restlessness, agitation,   blood, proceed to surgery immediately.
                                 transient hypotension, ECG ﬁndings of          Hemodynamic support with ﬂuids,
                                 pericarditis (partial or contained rupture).   inotropes, pressors, intra-aortic balloon
                                                                                counterpulsation.

 Interventricular septal         Hypotension and new murmur, conﬁrmed by        Hemodynamic support with afterload
 rupture                         pulmonary artery (PA) catheter or Doppler      reduction, and surgery.
                                 echocardiography.

 Papillary muscle rupture        Hemodynamic compromise and new                 Hemodynamic support with afterload
                                 murmur, conﬁrmed by PA catheter or Doppler     reduction, and surgery.
                                 echocardiography.

                                                                                                                            31
              CASE 20                    A 57-year-old investment banker presents to the emergency department with crushing
                                          substernal chest pain radiating to his left jaw. A 12-lead ECG demonstrates tall R waves
                                          in V1–V3 and a normal axis; troponin levels were elevated. No murmur was appreciated
                                          on initial examination. He is given morphine, aspirin, nitrates, and Plavix and is placed
                                          on supplemental oxygen. He is then taken to the catheterization lab, where a drug-
                                          eluting stent is placed. After 4 days, he is feeling well and walking in the hospital hall
                                          with a medical student checking his pulse oximeter. After 2 minutes, the patient begins
                                          sweating and states that he does not feel well. He promptly loses consciousness and
                                          falls to the ﬂoor. The medical student calls for help, places the patient back on oxygen,
                                          checks the patient’s blood pressure and auscultates the patient’s chest. He hears a
                                          blowing holosystolic murmur that radiates throughout the precordium and rales as the
                                          patient breathes.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?          Papillary muscle rupture following MI. Symptoms often include
                                                           chest pain, acute hypotension, and pulmonary edema. A holosystolic
                                                           murmur may be heard throughout the precordium. Echocardiography
                                                           is the modality of choice for diagnosis; begin with TTE, but proceed
                                                           to TEE if TTE is nondiagnostic. Afterload reduction with nitrates,
                                                           nitroprusside, or an aortic balloon pump followed by prompt surgical
                                                           intervention is essential.

              What was the distribution of                The ECG pattern described most likely represents a posterior infarct.
               ischemic injury?                            The “mirror test” involves inverting the ECG, then reading the image
                                                           as it appears in a mirror. Furthermore, papillary muscle rupture is

CARDIOLOGY
                                                           much more likely to occur in the setting of a posterior MI because the
                                                           posteromedial muscle has a single blood supply through the posterior
                                                           descending artery, but the other muscles are supplied by both the LAD
                                                           and LC arteries.
              What are the characteristics of the         See Table 1-3 and Figure 1-6.
               major murmurs?

                                                     Aortic stenosis

                                          Aortic valve                                                            Pulmonic valve
                                                areas                                                             areas
                                                                                                                     Mitral regurgitation

                                                                                                                      Mitral valve
                                                                                                                      areas

                                                                           Tricuspid valve
                                                                                    areas
                                          FIGURE 1-6.        Sites of precordial auscultation for maximal cardiac valve sounds and mur-
                                          murs.   (Modiﬁed, with permission, from LeBlond RF, Brown DD, DeGowin RL. DeGowin’s
                                          Diagnostic Examination, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2009: Fig. 8-18.)

             32
TA B L E 1- 3 .    Major Cardiac Murmur Characteristics

                                                                                                                         +
                                                                                                                       VENOUS
 MURMUR                          TIMING                LOCATION                      SPECIFIC SIGNS                    RETURN

 Mitral regurgitation            Holosystolic          PMI                           Handgrip                            +

 Tricuspid regurgitation         Holosystolic          R&L MSB                       Inspiration                         +
                                                                                     (Carvallo’s sign)

 HOCM                            Early/midsystolic     LLSB                          – Handgrip                          −

 Mitral prolapse                 Midsystolic           LLSB/PMI                      + Handgrip                          −

 Aortic stenosis                 Midsystolic           RUSB                          Crescendo-decrescendo               +

 ASD                             Late systolic                                       Fixed split S2

 VSD                             Holosystolic          LLSB                          + Handgrip

 Aortic regurgitation            Early diastolic       LUSB                          Squatting
                                                                                     Valsalva
                                                                                     Head bobbing
                                                                                     Wide pulse pressure

                                                                                                                                  CARDIOLOGY
                                                                                     Decrescendo

 Pulmonic stenosis               Early systolic        LMSB                          Inspiration
                                                                                     Crescendo-decrescendo

 Mitral stenosis                 Middiastolic          PMI in lateral decubitus      + Opening snap with inspiration

 Tricuspid stenosis              Middiastolic          R&L MSB                       – Opening snap with inspiration

 PDA                             Continuous                                          Machinery murmur

Increase afterload—handgrip.
Venous return—decreased by Valsalva, sit-to-stand. Increased by squatting, leg raise, inspiration.
LSB, lower sternal border; USB, upper sternal border; MSB, midsternal border; PMI, point of maximal impulse.

                                                                                                                             33
              CASE 21                    A 55-year-old man comes to the emergency department complaining of sharp chest
                                          pain progressively worsened over the past day. He localizes the pain to the middle
                                          of his chest and describes it as a “9 out of 10” sharp pain that is worse with deep
                                          inspiration and lying ﬂat; sitting forward seems to reduce the pain temporarily.
                                          He denies any medical history and takes no medications. Vital signs include a
                                          temperature of 38.0°C (100.4°F), blood pressure of 120/90 mm Hg, pulse rate of
                                          95/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. His
                                          physical examination shows no jugular venous distention; clear lung ﬁelds; regular
                                          heart rate and rhythm without murmurs, rubs, or gallops; and no tenderness to chest
                                          palpation. His abdominal, extremity, musculoskeletal, and neurologic examinations
                                          are normal. X-ray of the chest reveals clear lungs with a normal-sized heart and
                                          mediastinum. An ECG shows diffuse ST-segment elevation with upward concavity
                                          and “reciprocal” PR-segment changes (PR depression in leads with ST elevation, and
                                          vice versa).

              What is the most likely diagnosis?      Acute pericarditis. A chest x-ray with clear lung ﬁelds helps rule
                                                       out pneumonia and pneumothorax. Patients with pericarditis with
                                                       signiﬁcant effusions may have the following signs (PERIC): Pulsus
                                                       paradoxus, ECG changes, Rub (pericardial friction rub), Increased
                                                       jugular venous pressure, and Chest pain.

              What tests and/or imaging tools         Pericarditis is mainly a clinical diagnosis. However, a radiograph of
               could be used to conﬁrm the             the chest should be done to rule out other diseases that can present
               diagnosis?                              with similar chest pain, such as pneumonia and pneumothorax. An

CARDIOLOGY
                                                       echocardiogram can be done to conﬁrm a diagnosis of pericarditis by
                                                       demonstrating pericardial thickening or a pericardial effusion. Although
                                                       many patients with pericarditis do not have concurrent pericardial
                                                       effusions, the presence of an effusion in a clinical presentation such as
                                                       this one is very speciﬁc for pericarditis.
              What risk factors are associated        Most cases of pericarditis are idiopathic but have presumed viral or
               with an increased incidence of          autoimmune etiology. Other identiﬁable causes of pericardial disease
               this condition?                         include other infectious agents (bacterial, mycobacterial, fungal, and
                                                       parasitic), radiation, neoplastic, postinfarction, trauma, rheumatic
                                                       and nonrheumatic autoimmune diseases, drugs, and metabolic causes
                                                       (uremia, hypothyroidism). The mnemonic CARDIAC RIND can be
                                                       used to remember the major causes:
                                                       Collagen vascular disease
                                                       Aortic dissection
                                                       Radiation
                                                       Drugs
                                                       Infections
                                                       Acute renal failure (uremia)
                                                       Cardiac (myocardial infarction)
                                                       Rheumatic fever
                                                       Injury
                                                       Neoplasms
                                                       Dressler’s syndrome

             34
 What is the most appropriate    Treatment for pericarditis involves treating the underlying cause, as
  treatment for this condition?   well as performing pericardiocentesis, if necessary, for large effusions or
                                  cardiac tamponade. In this patient, because there is no apparent cause
                                  for his clinical syndrome, further testing may include complete blood
                                  count (given the mild fever), antinuclear antibody titers, tuberculin skin
                                  testing, serology, and blood cultures. An ECG should also be obtained.
                                  Finally, during the workup, the pain of pericarditis can be treated
                                  with indomethacin if kidney function is normal. In cases of recurrent
                                  pericarditis, prednisone can be beneﬁcial in a select population of
                                  patients with persistent pain such as those who have failed NSAID and
                                  colchicine (in general, use as a last resort as it can potentially lead to
                                  further recurrence).

                                                                                                                CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                          35
              CASE 22                       A 65-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with the chief complaint of leg
                                             pain. He notes that his buttocks and thighs ache bilaterally, left worse than right, when
                                             he walks more than a few blocks; the pain resolves with rest. He denies any history of
                                             trauma or problems with his joints; his past medical history is signiﬁcant for a 40-pack-
                                             year smoking history and an acute myocardial infarction (MI) at the age of 61 years.
                                             When questioned, he admits to impotence beginning a few months prior to his MI.
                                             On physical examination, he is seated comfortably on the table in no acute distress. His
                                             heart and lung exams are within normal limits. His radial pulses are 2+ and symmetric,
                                             but his femoral and dorsalis pedis pulses are diminished bilaterally. The skin on his legs
                                             is cool to the touch and appears shiny, with very little hair growth. There is no swelling
                                             or erythema of his hip or knee joints.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?           Intermittent claudication, due to peripheral vascular disease (PVD).
                                                            Given his description of buttock and hip pain with associated
                                                            impotence, he likely has aortoiliac occlusion, also known as Leriche’s
                                                            syndrome. His history of MI further supports a diagnosis of vascular
                                                            disease. Intermittent claudication is frequently the presenting symptom
                                                            of PVD, which can progress to rest pain and ischemia as arterial
                                                            occlusion worsens. The location of the pain within the lower extremity
                                                            reﬂects the location of the occlusion. Other conditions to rule out
                                                            include osteoarthritis and “pseudoclaudication” due to lumbar spinal
                                                            stenosis.

              What tests and/or imaging tools              Doppler ultrasound can be used to detect occlusions of blood ﬂow

CARDIOLOGY
               could be used to conﬁrm the                  and to calculate the ankle-brachial index (ABI). The ABI is the ratio
               diagnosis?                                   of the systolic blood pressure at the ankle and the arm. An ABI > 0.9
                                                            is normal; intermittent claudication occurs at values < 0.9, while rest
                                                            pain typically occurs at values < 0.4. Ultrasound can often identify
                                                            the location and extent of the occlusion, which is necessary if surgical
                                                            interventions are planned. CT angiography with runoff can further
                                                            delineate anatomical details prior to surgery.
              What risk factors are associated             Risk factors for PVD are similar to those for coronary atherosclerosis
               with an increased incidence of               and include diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, cigarette smoking,
               this condition?                              hypertension.
              What is the most appropriate                 This patient, who does not have rest pain or evidence of ischemia, is
               treatment for this patient?                  a candidate for conservative management. This includes immediate
                                                            tobacco cessation and control of underlying conditions, such as
                                                            diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. Exercise, as tolerated,
                                                            promotes the development of collateral circulation. Antiplatelet agents,
                                                            including aspirin, may also improve symptoms.
              What are the treatment options               Angioplasty and stenting may be helpful, depending on the location of
               for patients who fail conservative           the occlusion. Endovascular or open arterial bypass surgery can be used
               therapy?                                     to restore distal blood ﬂow. If ischemia and necrosis have progressed
                                                            signiﬁcantly, amputation of the affected area becomes necessary.
              What is the natural history of this          In a study of patients with intermittent claudication, 70–80% had
               condition?                                   stable symptoms, 10–20% had worsening symptoms, and 1–2% had
                                                            critical ischemia at 5 years. However, 20% had a nonfatal MI or
                                                            stroke, while 15–30% died from cardiovascular causes; atherosclerosis
                                                            in the peripheral arteries is an important marker for atherosclerosis
                                                            throughout the body, and these patients require a workup for coronary,
                                                            carotid, and renal artery disease.

             36
 CASE 23                   A 69-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and rheumatic heart disease in
                            childhood presents to the clinic complaining of worsening shortness of breath with
                            exertion, fatigue, and occasional palpitations. On physical examination, she appears
                            in no acute distress, and her vital signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F),
                            blood pressure of 140/80 mm Hg, pulse rate of 80/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, and
                            oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. Her physical examination is remarkable for mild
                            crackles in both lung ﬁelds bilaterally, a laterally displaced point of maximum impulse,
                            a diminished S1, and a 3/6 holosystolic murmur heard best at the apex and radiating to
                            the axilla. The murmur is reduced with Valsalva maneuver.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Mitral regurgitation (MR). In a patient with subacute or worsening
                                          dyspnea, fatigue, palpitations, and a systolic murmur, the two most
                                          important etiologies to consider are MR and aortic stenosis. The
                                          murmur of aortic stenosis usually occurs in early systole, radiates to the
                                          carotids, and is associated with a slow carotid upstroke; the murmur
                                          of MR is usually holosystolic, radiates to the axilla, and is associated
                                          with a “bounding” carotid pulse, similar to aortic regurgitation.
                                          Echocardiography is essential to conﬁrm the diagnosis as well as to
                                          appropriately stage the disease (measuring ventricular diameter, ﬂow
                                          velocities, extent of regurgitation, etc.).

 What is the pathophysiology of          The mechanisms that cause symptoms include a dilated, eccentrically
  the progression of this condition?      hypertrophied left ventricle that has remodeled to compensate for the
                                          increased volume load due to backward ﬂow. This eventually results

                                                                                                                       CARDIOLOGY
                                          in systolic dysfunction and increased left atrial and pulmonary venous
                                          volumes. Left atrial enlargement can result in atrial ﬁbrillation, as
                                          suggested by this patient’s palpitations.
 What medical management                 Patients with symptoms of mitral regurgitation beneﬁt from acute
  options exist?                          vasodilator therapy (which reduces preload on the left ventricle,
                                          thereby reducing the “stretching” pressure on the mitral valve
                                          oriﬁce) or β-blockers, calcium channel blockers, hydralazine, or
                                          diuretics to reduce afterload and encourage forward ﬂow. However,
                                          as mentioned above, patients with chronic symptomatic MR should
                                          be referred for surgery. Additionally, patients with rheumatic MR
                                          and atrial ﬁbrillation, or history of systemic embolization should
                                          receive anticoagulation. Patients with nonrheumatic MR should also
                                          receive anticoagulation, if they have atrial ﬁbrillation or a history of
                                          embolization.
 What surgical management                The surgical options in chronic mitral regurgitation include mitral
  options exist?                          valve repair (also known as mitral valve annuloplasty) and mitral valve
                                          replacement. Repair has been shown to have better outcomes than
                                          replacement, although replacement is indicated in the following
                                          situations:
                                           Extensive calciﬁcation or degeneration of a leaﬂet or annulus.
                                           Prolapse of more than one-third of the leaﬂet tissue.
                                           Active endocarditis.
                                           Extensive chordal fusion, calciﬁcation, or papillary muscle rupture.

                                                                                                                  37
              CASE 24                         A 70-year-old man with a history of hypertension is brought to the emergency
                                               department by his wife after having a “fainting” spell 2 hours earlier. He denies any
                                               preceding light-headedness, nausea, diaphoresis, chest pain, palpitations, or confusion;
                                               his wife reports “he just collapsed and woke up 15 seconds later.” She denies witnessing
                                               any convulsive movements or any postictal symptoms. He has a history signiﬁcant only
                                               for hypertension that is controlled with metoprolol. Vital signs include a temperature of
                                               37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 125/70 mm Hg, pulse rate of 60/min, and respiratory
                                               rate of 10/min. His chest is clear, his heart examination reveals a regular rate and
                                               rhythm with no murmurs or gallops, he has normal bowel sounds, and has
                                               unremarkable extremity and neurologic examinations. An ECG taken on arrival is
                                               shown in Figure 1-7.

             F I G U R E 1 - 7.   (Reproduced, with permission, from Hay WW Jr, Levin MJ, Sondheimer JM, Deterding RR. Current Pediatric
             Diagnosis & Treatment, 17th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 19-11.)

CARDIOLOGY
              What is the most likely diagnosis?             Second-degree atrioventricular block (Mobitz type II). This type of
                                                              bradyarrhythmia is deﬁned by an electrocardiogram that shows normal
                                                              PR intervals with P waves that intermittently fail to conduct to the
                                                              ventricles, resulting in “dropped” QRS complexes, as this patient’s
                                                              ECG shows. The failure of P waves to conduct to the ventricles
                                                              can result in dizziness or syncope; faster heart rates can worsen the
                                                              block, and maneuvers that slow the sinus rate may facilitate improved
                                                              conduction.

              How is this condition classiﬁed?               Atrioventricular block is classiﬁed into three groups based on
                                                              electrocardiographic criteria: ﬁrst degree (lengthened PR interval
                                                              indicating slowed conduction, without missed ventricular beats),
                                                              second degree (occasional missed beats, with or without PR interval
                                                              prolongation), and third degree (complete conduction block with
                                                              dissociation of atrial and ventricular activity). Second-degree heart
                                                              block can be subdivided into two types: Mobitz type I (also known
                                                              as Wenckebach), in which progressive PR elongation precedes a
                                                              nonconducted P wave, and Mobitz type II, in which the PR interval
                                                              remains unchanged prior to a nonconducted P wave.
              What drugs are contraindicated in              Digitalis, calcium channel blockers (verapamil more than diltiazem),
               this condition?                                amiodarone, adenosine, and β-blockers can all slow AV conduction
                                                              and cause or contribute to AV block; they should not be used in
                                                              patients with second or third degree AV block in the absence of a
                                                              pacemaker.

             38
 What is the pathogenesis of this   About half of the cases of atrioventricular block are caused by
  condition?                         idiopathic, progressive ﬁbrotic, and sclerodegenerative changes in the
                                     cardiac conduction system. These changes can affect only the AV node
                                     or the His-Purkinje system (causing ﬁrst-, second-, or third-degree heart
                                     block), or a combination of conducting tissues, leading to left or right
                                     bundle branch block. Ischemic heart disease is the cause of about 40%
                                     of cases; 20% of patients with acute myocardial infarctions develop
                                     some kind of atrioventricular block, and approximately 10–20%
                                     develop bundle branch or fascicular blocks.

 What is the most appropriate       The ﬁrst step in management is searching for reversible causes of
  treatment for this patient?        slowed conduction, such as ischemia, increased vagal tone, and
                                     drugs that slow conduction. Therefore, this patient should have an
                                     ECG and serial cardiac enzymes to evaluate for myocardial ischemia,
                                     especially if a new left bundle branch block is present. The ﬁrst step
                                     in management should be to discontinue his β-blocker, as this may be
                                     the etiology of heart block. There are other medications that can be
                                     prescribed for hypertension that will not affect his conduction system.
                                     Finally, according to the ACC/AHA/NASPE guidelines for permanent
                                     pacemaker indications, symptomatic high-degree atrioventricular block
                                     may be treated with permanent pacemaker placement.

                                                                                                                 CARDIOLOGY

                                                                                                           39
              CASE 25                    A 45-year-old man with no signiﬁcant medical history is brought by his wife to the
                                          emergency department (ED) complaining of a fainting episode earlier that morning
                                          after breakfast. He reports no memory of the event; he says he was getting up from
                                          the table, and the “next thing he knew” he was lying on the kitchen ﬂoor. His wife
                                          reports he was unconscious for about 15 seconds. He denies other symptoms, including
                                          prodromal light-headedness, nausea, vision changes, diaphoresis, chest pain, shortness
                                          of breath, or vertigo. His wife denies witnessing any convulsive movements and denies
                                          any signs of confusion in her husband following the episode. The patient admits to
                                          recently increasing his caffeine intake to two cups of coffee per morning. Vital signs
                                          include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg, pulse
                                          rate of 110/min, and respiratory rate of 10/min. His physical examination is notable for
                                          a regular tachycardia without murmurs, rubs, or gallops, and unremarkable HEENT,
                                          lung, and neurological examinations. His 12-lead ECG from the ED and from his
                                          outpatient clinic 2 weeks ago are shown as Figures 1-8 and 1-9, respectively.

              What conditions should be                This patient’s syncopal episode can be explained by a sudden reduction
               included in the differential             in cardiac output resulting from a cardiac dysrhythmia. The differential
               diagnosis?                               diagnosis of narrow-complex tachycardias includes sinus tachycardia,
                                                        atrial ﬁbrillation, atrial ﬂutter, multifocal atrial tachycardia,
                                                        atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), atrioventricular
                                                        reciprocating tachycardia (AVRT), and paroxysmal atrial tachycardia;
                                                        these can be subdivided into regular and irregular.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       This ECG shows retrograde P waves after QRS (Figure 1-9). Both

CARDIOLOGY
                                                        AVRT and AVNRT have retrograde P waves, but AVNRT usually has
                                                        a pseudo R wave in V1 which is actually the p wave buried in the
                                                        terminal portion of the QRS. Also, the R-P interval with AVRT is long
                                                        because retrograde conduction to the atrium is via the AV node, which
                                                        conducts slowly; the opposite is true for typical AVNRT which is the
                                                        more common form of AVNRT, AVRT is most likely. In addition, the
                                                        old ECG (Figure 1-8) shows a Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) pattern
                                                        of abnormal ventricular activation (“pre-excitation”), as evidenced by
                                                        the widened QRS complex with a “delta”-wave and a short PR interval
                                                        best seen in V5 and V6.
              What is the pathophysiology of           The presence of a “tract” that connects the atria to the ventricles and
               this condition?                          bypasses the AV node is a setup for danger. Normally, the AV node
                                                        “decrementally conducts”; that is, impulses take longer to conduct
                                                        through the AV node at faster heart rates, a nicely self-limiting safety
                                                        mechanism. A bypass tract can therefore potentially conduct fast
                                                        arrhythmias (atrial ﬁbrillation or ﬂutter) directly to the ventricles in
                                                        a 1:1 ratio, leading to life-threatening ventricular rates of 300 bpm
                                                        or greater. WPW syndrome is the combination of ventricular pre-
                                                        excitation (earlier ventricular activation due to the bypass tract) with
                                                        paroxysmal tachyarrhythmias that produce syncope or presyncope.

             40
 What are the possible                  Patients with only the WPW pattern (preexcitation delta waves on
  pharmacologic and                      ECG) are not treated unless their livelihood, mental well-being,
  nonpharmacologic treatments for        insurability, or the public safety would be affected by a spontaneous
  this patient?                          tachyarrhythmia or ECG abnormality. For primary drug therapy,
                                         amiodarone can be used chronically in patients with a limited life
                                         expectancy or with contraindications to catheter ablation. Of note, AV
                                         nodal blockers are contraindicated in patients with WPW and atrial
                                         ﬁbrillation or some wide-complex tachycardias, given that blockade of
                                         the AV node may lead to preferential conduction down the bypass tract

                                                                                                                      CARDIOLOGY
                          FIGURE 1-8.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Crawford MH. Current Diagnosis &
                          Treatment in Cardiology, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2003: Fig. 19-11A.)

                          FIGURE 1-9.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Crawford MH. Current Diagnosis &
                          Treatment in Cardiology, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2003: Fig. 19-12.)

                                                                                                                 41
                  N OT E S

CARDIOLOGY

             42
Dermatology

Case 1        44

Case 2        46

Case 3        47

Case 4        48

Case 5        50

Case 6        51

Case 7        52

Case 8        53

Case 9        54

Case 10       56

Case 11       58

Case 12       60

Case 13       62

Case 14       64

Case 15       66

Case 16       68

Case 17       69

Case 18       70

                   43
                CASE 1                    A 32-year-old obese woman presents to her primary care physician’s ofﬁce for a
                                           preemployment physical. She states that she is in good health, but she has noticed
                                           darkening areas around her axillae and under her breasts. She ﬁrst noticed the dark
                                           areas a few years ago but has not paid much attention to them. Her family history is
                                           remarkable for obesity, heart disease, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. On
                                           physical examination, the patient is a well-appearing but obese female. Her blood
                                           pressure is 135/85 mm Hg, and her heart rate is 80/min. Her body mass index (BMI)
                                           is 32 kg/m2. Examination of the skin shows prominent skin lines in the patient’s axilla
                                           (Figure 2-1), posterior neck, and underneath her breasts. There are also dark, “dirty-
                                           appearing,” velvety plaques in these regions.

DE RMATOLOGY

                                           FIGURE 2-1.         (Reprinted, with permission, from Wolff K, Johnson RA, Suurmond D.
                                           Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                           2005: Fig. 5-1.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?           Acanthosis nigricans (AN) is consistent with the appearance of
                                                              thickened, dark, dirty-appearing, velvety plaques with prominent skin
                                                              lines in ﬂexural areas. Prevalence is equal among men and women but
                                                              is much more common in persons with darker skin pigmentation.

                How is this condition classiﬁed?             It is classiﬁed into two broad categories:
                                                               Benign (more common), which is usually associated with underlying
                                                                 diabetes or insulin resistance
                                                               Malignant (far less common), which is associated with an underlying
                                                                 malignancy
                What is the pathophysiology of               It is mostly likely caused by factors that stimulate epidermal
                 this condition?                              keratinocyte and dermal ﬁbroblast production in the skin. In benign
                                                              AN, the factor is believed to be insulin or insulin-like growth factor; in
                                                              malignant AN, it is believed to be a factor produced by the tumor or in
                                                              response to the tumor, possibly transforming growth factor-α.

               44
 What other conditions are            Adverse Drug Reactions
  associated with this condition?      Endocrine disorders:
                                         Diabetes
                                         Cushing’s syndrome
                                         HAIR-AN syndrome (HyperAndrogenism, Insulin Resistance, and
                                          Acanthosis Nigricans)
                                         Insulin resistance (AN may predict the later development of type 2
                                          diabetes)
                                         Malignancy (usually gastrointestinal or lung cancers)
                                         Obesity

 What test(s) should be done for a   Patients with acanthosis nigricans should receive a fasting glucose test
  patient with this condition?        to rule out diabetes mellitus.
 What are the typical ﬁndings on     The histological ﬁndings of acanthosis nigricans on skin biopsy are
  skin biopsy?                        hyperkeratosis with proliferation of melanocytes.
 What is the most appropriate        The treatment of acanthosis nigricans is treatment of the underlying
  treatment for this condition?       disorder. This includes weight loss for treatment of obesity and insulin
                                      resistance or searching for an occult malignancy.

                                                                                                                  DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                             45
                CASE 2                    A 16-year-old boy presents to his pediatrician complaining of “pimples.” He ﬁrst noticed
                                           the bumps on his forehead around the hairline a few weeks ago, and since that time,
                                           new groups have come and gone on his nose and also on both cheeks. The bumps vary
                                           in appearance, some about the size of a pencil point and black, while others are white,
                                           a little larger, and have a ring of red around them. He has tried washing his face more
                                           often, but that has not helped. He does not complain of any constitutional symptoms.
                                           On physical examination, the patient is anxious but well appearing, and has papules
                                           and pustules ranging in size from 1 to 3 mm over his forehead, cheeks, nose, and upper
                                           back around his shoulders. The papules are black and smaller than the pustules, ringed
                                           with a thin erythematous border, and painful when pressed.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Acne vulgaris. This is a common skin disease characterized by non-
                                                         inﬂammatory follicular papules (comedones) and by inﬂammatory
                                                         papules, pustules, and nodules. It affects areas of the body that contain
                                                         the highest concentration of sebaceous glands, mainly the face, upper
                                                         chest, and back. A comedone can be a “whitehead” (closed comedone)
                                                         or a “blackhead” (open comedone) without any signs of inﬂammation.

                What is the pathophysiology of          The cause of acne vulgaris is multifactorial. Current research
                 this condition?                         demonstrates that follicular epidermal hyperproliferation triggered
                                                         by increased androgens, changes in skin lipid composition, and/or
                                                         inﬂammatory cytokines play a role in acne outbreaks. Subsequent
                                                         plugging of the follicle by excess sebum secretion leads to colonization
                                                         by Propionibacterium acnes, which contributes to local inﬂammation.

DE RMATOLOGY
                What is the epidemiology of this        Acne vulgaris affects a large proportion of the population (85–100%) at
                 condition?                              some point in life. However, men are more commonly affected initially
                                                         during adolescence, and women are more commonly affected in
                                                         adulthood. Prevalence is similar in African-Americans and Caucasians.
                How is this condition classiﬁed?        Acne vulgaris is classiﬁed by the presence and severity of inﬂammation:
                                                          Comedonal: No inﬂammatory lesions present.
                                                          Mild inﬂammatory: comedones, inﬂammatory papules.
                                                          Moderate inﬂammatory: comedones, inﬂammatory papules, pustules.
                                                          Nodulocystic: comedones, inﬂammatory papules, pustules, nodules
                                                           greater than 5 mm in diameter, scarring often present.
                What factors may contribute to          Though external causes of acne vulgaris are rarely identiﬁed,
                 an increased incidence of this          medications such as steroids, lithium, some antiepileptics, and iodides
                 condition?                              can promote acne. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, polycystic ovarian
                                                         syndrome and other endocrine disorders that involve excess androgens
                                                         may also promote development.
                What tests and/or imaging tools         Acne vulgaris is a clinical diagnosis; however, female patients with
                 could be used to conﬁrm the             dysmenorrhea or hirsutism require a formal hormonal evaluation.
                 diagnosis?                              In patients without response to typical treatments (topical retinoids,
                                                         topical antibiotics, benzoyl peroxide, and/or systemic tetracyclines) skin
                                                         lesion culture to rule out gram-negative folliculitis is indicated.
                What are possible complications          Physical pain from skin inﬂammation
                 of this condition?                       Psychological suffering related to poor self-image
                                                          Severe inﬂammatory variants are associated with fever, arthritis, and
                                                            other systemic symptoms
                What is the prognosis for patients      By age 25, 5% of men still have acne, while 12% of women do. By
                 with this condition?                    age 45, both sexes are at 5%. Therefore, the overall prognosis is good;
                                                         however, long-lasting psychosocial impairment and skin scarring may
                                                         be evident.

               46
 CASE 3                     A 13-month-old girl is brought to the pediatrician by her parents for itchy rashes on her
                             arms, legs, and cheeks. The rashes appeared gradually over the past few weeks and seem
                             to be worsening. Her skin has always been dry, and her parents have used baby lotion
                             on her since she was a few weeks old. She has not had fevers or any recent illnesses. On
                             physical examination, she has scaly, crusted, pink, ill-deﬁned patches on the ﬂexural
                             surfaces of her arms and legs. Both cheeks are also red, with notable excoriations. The
                             remainder of her examination is normal.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Atopic dermatitis or eczema. This is a very common condition,
                                           which affects approximately 15% of children in the United States. Its
                                           association with other atopic disorders, asthma, and allergic rhinitis
                                           remains controversial.

 How does patient age affect              There are three distinct stages of the disease:
  disease presentation?                     Infantile: patients < 1 year have exudative, crusted patches on their
                                             extensor and ﬂexural surfaces, cheeks, and scalp, while the diaper
                                             area is spared.
                                            Childhood: patches have less exudate and are found in the ﬂexural
                                             areas, especially the antecubital and popliteal fossae.
                                            Adulthood: ~40% of patients clear the disease by adulthood;
                                             distribution is similar to childhood, but patches are more localized
                                             and licheniﬁed.
 What is the pathogenesis of this         The most accepted theory of eczema is a break in the permeability of
  condition?                               the epidermis, allowing antigenic agents to contact the body’s immune

                                                                                                                         DE RMATOLOGY
                                           cells and cause inﬂammation in the skin. Permeability depends
                                           on interactions between skin keratinocytes and structural proteins,
                                           including ﬁlaggrin; mutations in this protein are frequently found in
                                           eczema patients. These interactions also affect the skin’s ability to hold
                                           water, which is impaired in eczema.
 What conditions should be                 Contact dermatitis
  included in the differential              Seborrheic dermatitis
  diagnosis?                                Drug reactions

                                           In infants, other considerations include:
                                            Psoriasis
                                            Scabies
                                            Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
                                            Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome

 What is the most appropriate             Chronic treatment of eczema involves minimizing symptoms and
  long-term treatment for this             preventing exacerbations. Trigger factors for these patients can include
  condition?                               heat, perspiration, and low humidity, which should be avoided if
                                           possible. Bacterial and viral skin infections should be promptly treated.
                                           Pruritus can be minimized with antihistamines. Consistent skin
                                           hydration is also crucial. Patients should bathe once daily, pat their
                                           skin dry, and then immediately apply the strongest moisturizer they can
                                           tolerate (ointment > cream > lotion).
 What is the most appropriate             Eczema ﬂares involve increased inﬂammation of the skin. Initial
  treatment for patients                   treatment should include topical glucocorticoids, which are available
  experiencing a ﬂare?                     in different potencies. High potency steroids are not used in the
                                           skin folds nor on the face, because of a high risk of atrophy. For
                                           patients who need prolonged therapy, topical calcineurin inhibitors
                                           (such as tacrolimus or pimecrolimus) can be used. Systemic
                                           immunosuppression may be necessary for those that fail topical therapy.

                                                                                                                    47
                CASE 4                     A 56-year-old man presents to his dermatologist for evaluation of a lesion on his nose
                                            (Figure 2-2). He has had other similar lesions on his face that were treated with surgical
                                            excision. He is of Irish descent and has a long history of sun exposure from working
                                            as a farmer. On physical examination, the patient has clear evidence of sun damage
                                            and looks much older than his stated age. There are well-healed surgical scars on his
                                            forehead, nose, and left cheek. An erythematous, smooth papule with a translucent
                                            surface is observed on the left side of the patient’s nose.

DE RMATOLOGY
                                           FIGURE 2-2.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Wolff K, Johnson RA, Suurmond D.
                                           Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                           2005: Fig. 11-11B.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Basal cell carcinomas are the most
                                                           common type of cancer. The podular variant typically appears as a
                                                           pearly colored papule, though the surface may appear translucent and
                                                           ﬁne telangiectasias may be present. They appear on sun-exposed areas
                                                           of skin, are slow growing, and rarely metastasize.

                How is this condition classiﬁed?          There are a number of different subtypes of BCCs based on
                                                           histopathology:
                                                            Nodular
                                                            Superﬁcial
                                                            Sclerosing/morpheaform

                                                           This patient likely has a nodular BCC, the most common subtype.
                What is the epidemiology of this          BCC affects all races and skin types, but is more likely to be found
                 condition?                                in individuals with fair skin. Historically, men are twice as likely to
                                                           be affected as women, given greater overall sun exposure. Incidence
                                                           increases with age, and those under 40 are uncommonly affected
                                                           except in the presence of a genetic syndrome.
                What risk factors are associated          Risk factors for BCC include both environmental (chronic exposure
                 with an increased incidence of            to ultraviolet radiation/sunlight, chronic arsenic exposure, therapeutic
                 this condition?                           radiation, past sunburns, and the use of tanning beds) and patient
                                                           factors (fair skin, light-colored eyes, red hair, childhood freckling,
                                                           northern European descent, older age, immunosuppression, and basal
                                                           cell nevus syndrome).

               48
 What conditions should be          Actinic keratosis
  considered in the differential     Intradermal nevus
  diagnosis?                         Squamous cell carcinoma
                                     Basal cell carcinoma
                                     Seborrheic keratosis

 What are the typical ﬁndings on   Skin biopsy of a basal cell carcinoma reveals characteristic basophilic
  skin biopsy?                      palisading cells with retraction.
 What is the most appropriate      A variety of treatment options exist for BCC. Factors to consider in
  treatment for this condition?     choosing the best treatment option include patient characteristics,
                                    tumor characteristics, and features of the various treatment modalities
                                    (i.e., cost, cure/recurrence rates, morbidity). The treatment options
                                    include both surgical and nonsurgical interventions. Surgical options
                                    include cryosurgery, electrosurgery, surgical excision, and Mohs’
                                    micrographic surgery. Nonsurgical options include radiation therapy,
                                    5-ﬂuorouracil cream, imiquimod cream, or photodynamic therapy.

                                                                                                               DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                          49
                CASE 5                    A 66-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of recurrent
                                           outbreaks of blisters all over his body. The blisters slowly increase in size and become
                                           tense and pruritic. When the blisters break open, clear ﬂuid drains. Painful erosions
                                           develop after the blisters collapse. On physical examination, the patient has multiple
                                           blisters in different stages concentrated mostly on his upper arms and thighs. There
                                           are a few erythematous plaques, a number of large, tense bullae, and scattered deep
                                           erosions and crusts. Nikolsky’s sign is negative. He does not have any lesions on the
                                           mucous membranes.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Bullous pemphigoid. Bullous pemphigoid is a chronic blistering
                                                          disease characterized by prodromal erythematous edematous plaques
                                                          that may develop into large, tense blisters ﬁlled with clear ﬂuid. The
                                                          collapsed bullae leave erosions and crusts. The condition is often more
                                                          pruritic than painful, and the mucous membranes are rarely involved.
                                                          Nikolsky’s sign (separation of the outer layer of the epidermis when
                                                          lateral pressure is applied to the skin) is negative.

                What is the epidemiology of this         Bullous pemphigoid has been reported to affect all age groups but
                 condition?                               occurs far more commonly in persons aged 60 and older. Since it is so
                                                          uncommon, its frequency is unknown, though it probably affects men
                                                          and women equally without predilection for race.
                What is the pathophysiology of           Bullous pemphigoid is caused by IgG autoantibodies that bind the BP1
                 this condition?                          and BP2 proteins present in hemidesmosomes in the skin basement

DE RMATOLOGY
                                                          membrane. This activates complement and inﬂammatory mediators.
                                                          Immune cells attracted to the area release proteases that degrade
                                                          hemidesmosomes and lead to blister formation.
                What test could be used to               The diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid is conﬁrmed by direct
                 conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    immunoﬂuorescence (DIF). Immunostaining a skin biopsy specimen
                                                          in bullous pemphigoid demonstrates IgG and complement C3
                                                          deposition in a ﬂuorescent linear band at the dermal-epidermal
                                                          junction.
                What are the treatment options for       Treatment is aimed at reducing the inﬂammatory response and
                 this condition?                          autoantibody production. For mild cases, topical steroids may be used,
                                                          but more severe cases may require systemic steroid therapy. Systemic
                                                          steroid-sparing agents such as azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil,
                                                          cyclophosphamide, or methotrexate may be used in combination
                                                          with oral prednisone. For patients who are unable to tolerate systemic
                                                          steroids, azathioprine, dapsone, or tetracycline plus nicotinamide may
                                                          be used.
                What adverse events are associated       There are several conditions related to the long-term use of
                 with treatment?                          immunosuppressants: secondary skin infections, malignancy, bone
                                                          marrow suppression, growth retardation (in children), adrenal
                                                          insufﬁciency, and osteoporosis.
                What is the prognosis for patients       Patients require treatment from 6 to 60 months, after which long-
                 with this condition?                     term remission is likely. Most mortality occurs secondary to effects of
                                                          the medications. Also, these medications may exacerbate comorbid
                                                          conditions such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and heart disease
                                                          that commonly affect this population.

               50
 CASE 6                    An 18-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for his annual checkup.
                            Before leaving the ofﬁce, he complains of a few bumps near his lips that cause him
                            signiﬁcant pain. He recalls a strange tingling and burning sensation near the left corner
                            of his lips that occurred a week ago. A few days later, he saw a small group of bumps
                            appear in the same area. Physical examination is normal except for small groups of
                            2-mm vesicles on an erythematous base around the left angle of his mouth.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Herpes simplex infection (HSV-1 or HSV-2) causing herpes labialis.
                                          HSV-1 causes oral lesions in approximately 80% of cases and genital
                                          lesions in 20% of cases, while for HSV-2 the opposite is true. Herpes
                                          viruses can cause a variety of diseases, including gingivostomatitis,
                                          keratoconjunctivitis, encephalitis, genital disease, and newborn
                                          infection.

 What is the epidemiology of this        In the United States, antibodies to HSV-1 are found in 80% of the
  condition?                              population, while antibodies to HSV-2 are found in 20%. For genital
                                          herpes, the incidence is 500,000–1,000,000 cases per year, with a
                                          prevalence of 40–60 million infected individuals.
 What is the pathophysiology of          HSV-1 is spread by respiratory droplets or direct exposure to infected
  this condition?                         saliva. HSV-2 is transmitted by genital contact involving mucous
                                          membranes or intact skin. The virus causes cellular necrosis, with ﬂuid
                                          build-up between the dermis and epidermis, creating vesicles. The
                                          ﬂuid is then absorbed, a scab forms, and healing is completed without

                                                                                                                        DE RMATOLOGY
                                          scarring. The virus travels from the site of infection to the sensory
                                          dorsal root and remains latent until a recurrent outbreak occurs; these
                                          are triggered by UV radiation, trauma, emotional or psychological
                                          stress, and immunosuppression.
 What other symptoms are                 Many primary infections are asymptomatic; however, when
  common in patients with this            symptomatic they are often more severe than recurrences. Prodromal
  condition?                              symptoms include burning, itching, tingling, and pain prior to vesicle
                                          appearance. Symptoms that can occur with the outbreak of the lesion
                                          include fever, general malaise, headache, anorexia, myalgias, dysuria
                                          with genital lesions, and sore throat with oral lesions.
 What tests and/or procedures            Depending on the type of infection caused by HSV, tests and
  could be used to conﬁrm the             procedures will differ. For skin lesions, a viral culture is typically
  diagnosis?                              more sensitive than a Tzanck smear; however, this can depend on
                                          the duration of viral shedding. For ocular involvement, a slit-lamp
                                          examination for dendritic keratitis should be done. If encephalitis is a
                                          concern, a lumbar puncture looking for lymphocytic pleocytosis and
                                          PCR for HSV DNA is useful.
 What is the most appropriate            HSV medications inhibit the replication of viral DNA but do not
  treatment for this condition?           cure the disease. For primary outbreaks of genital herpes and HSV
                                          encephalitis, acyclovir is used; however, it is not recommended
                                          for primary outbreaks of oral-labial herpes as seen in this patient.
                                          Topical 1% triﬂuridine is used for herpes simplex keratoconjunctivitis.
                                          Recurrent outbreaks of oral-labial herpes may be treated with acyclovir,
                                          while daily suppressive doses of valacyclovir may be used for recurrent
                                          genital outbreaks.
 What is the prognosis for patients      There is a high recurrence rate for patients with genital HSV-2
  with this condition?                    infection. More than 85% of patients with one symptomatic episode
                                          will experience another.

                                                                                                                  51
                CASE 7                     A 38-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a complaint of pain
                                            and bumps in both of her armpits. The bumps have come and gone over the past
                                            several months and are red, warm, and painful to the touch. She has also noticed
                                            intermittent drainage and has tried applying several over-the-counter creams and baby
                                            powder to the area, without improvement. On physical examination, she is an obese
                                            woman with a body mass index of 35 kg/m2 and is profusely sweating, with stains on her
                                            shirt about her axillae. Her exam is otherwise normal except for multiple raised, hard
                                            nodules in her axillae bilaterally that cause the patient considerable pain and drain a
                                            thick yellow liquid when pressed.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Hidradenitis suppurativa. This is a chronic condition
                                                          characterized by painful swollen nodules in areas of the body
                                                          where apocrine sweat glands are located (axillae, areola of the
                                                          nipple, groin, perineum, circumanal, and periumbilical regions).
                                                          It is a chronic acneiform infection of the apocrine glands that can
                                                          involve surrounding cutaneous tissue and fascia.

                What is the epidemiology of this         Hidradenitis suppurativa is a relatively common disorder thought to
                 condition?                               affect 1–2% of the population. Females are more commonly affected
                                                          than males (4:1 or 5:1 ratio). Ingrown hairs are a predisposing factor, so
                                                          individuals with tightly curled hair tend to be affected more frequently.
                What is the pathophysiology of           Hidradenitis suppurativa results from a follicular occlusion that
                 this condition?                          blocks drainage from the apocrine glands and causes perifolliculitis.

DE RMATOLOGY
                                                          Therefore, it is a disorder of the terminal follicular epithelium located
                                                          in areas rich in apocrine glands.
                What risk factors are associated         Hidradenitis suppurativa is associated with excessive heat, perspiration,
                 with an increased incidence of           tight clothing, obesity, cigarette smoking, stress, and probable genetic
                 this condition?                          disposition. There is also an association with Graves’ disease and
                                                          Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
                What are the typical laboratory          Culture of the exudate will yield a variety of saprophytic and
                 ﬁndings in this condition?               pathogenic bacteria, with a large proportion of staphylococci and
                                                          streptococci.
                What is the most appropriate             For large, painful, ﬂuctuant nodules, incision and drainage may be
                 treatment for this condition?            necessary if the lesion does not open spontaneously; however, most will
                                                          resolve on their own. General surgery consultation is appropriate for
                                                          the removal of sinus tracts, curettage, or exteriorization of the gland.
                                                          For severe cases, skin grafts may be considered. Appropriate antibiotics
                                                          should be given if cellulitis is suspected or if the patient is febrile.
                                                          Admission to the hospital is warranted if the patient appears toxic.
                What is the prognosis for patients       While individual lesions usually heal in 10–30 days, with or without
                 with this condition?                     drainage, recurrence is common, and progressive scarring and sinus
                                                          tracts may develop. Spontaneous and complete resolution occurs in
                                                          only rare cases.

               52
 CASE 8                     A 24-year-old new patient presents to a local clinic for evaluation of a dark spot on the
                             roof of her mouth. She ﬁrst noticed the discoloration while she was brushing her teeth,
                             but she does not remember exactly when it ﬁrst appeared. It does not itch nor cause her
                             any pain or trouble eating. Her family history is unremarkable; however, she has been
                             working as a sex worker since the age of 18 and does not routinely use a condom for
                             protection. The patient appears comfortable, with a heart rate of 90/min, respirations
                             of 12/min, and temperature of 37.0º C (98.5º F). Her physical examination is normal
                             except for a 2 × 2-cm, violaceous, slightly raised plaque on her rear right palate.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Kaposi sarcoma (KS). This is a spindle cell tumor thought to be of
                                           endothelial cell lineage. It has a variable course ranging from minimal
                                           mucocutaneous disease to extensive organ involvement. It is strongly
                                           associated with human herpesvirus 8, which is transmitted in the saliva.

 What is the epidemiology of this         The incidence of KS was low in the United States before the AIDS
  condition?                               epidemic, peaked in 1989, then declined to its current level, around
                                           2500 cases per year. Incidence remains highest in African-American
                                           males.
 How is this condition classiﬁed?          Epidemic/AIDS-related: occurs in advanced HIV infection and is the
                                              most common presentation. Most clinically aggressive form.
                                            Immunocompromised: occurs following solid-organ transplant or
                                             aggressive immunosuppression; rare but more common in patients at
                                             risk for classic form.

                                                                                                                         DE RMATOLOGY
                                            Classic/sporadic: occurs primarily in men of Mediterranean and
                                             Eastern European background with an age of onset at 50–70 years
                                             old; has a protracted and indolent course.
                                            Endemic: occurs primarily in men but also in women and children
                                             who are HIV seronegative in Africa; may have indolent or aggressive
                                             course.
 What conditions should be                 Bacillary angiomatosis
  included in the differential              Hematoma
  diagnosis?                                Purpura
                                            Dermatoﬁbroma
                                            Hemangioma

 What test and/or procedure could         Patients suspected of being infected with KS should have an HIV test,
  be used to conﬁrm the diagnosis?         followed by a CD4 count and viral load if positive. A biopsy of the
                                           affected area will be necessary to establish a deﬁnitive diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate             For HIV patients, the initiation of HAART is paramount and has been
  treatment for this condition?            shown to signiﬁcantly change the clinical course of KS. Radiation,
                                           laser or cryotherapy is suitable for local therapy in individuals who
                                           have cosmetically unacceptable lesions or have locally advanced
                                           symptomatic disease; however, these therapies do not stop new
                                           lesions from forming. Chemotherapy and cytokine therapy is used
                                           for symptomatic or life-threatening visceral disease as well as rapidly
                                           progressive mucocutaneous disease.
 What is the prognosis for patients       Most patients with epidemic (HIV-associated) KS do not die of the
  with this condition?                     disease, and patients on HAART tend to have an indolent course and
                                           recover spontaneously. Overall, morbidity may result from cosmetically
                                           disﬁguring cutaneous lesions, lymphedema, gastrointestinal
                                           involvement, or pulmonary involvement. The most common cause of
                                           mortality is uncontrollable hemorrhage from pulmonary involvement.

                                                                                                                   53
                CASE 9                    A 55-year-old woman with a history of hepatitis C infection presents to her primary care
                                           physician’s ofﬁce complaining of vulvar itching. On further questioning, she mentions
                                           that she has noticed lesions on both wrists. They are also pruritic but not as bothersome
                                           as the vulvar itching. On physical examination, sharply deﬁned, ﬂat-topped, polygonal,
                                           violaceous papules are observed on the ﬂexor surface of the wrists. The surfaces of
                                           the lesions are shiny with ﬁne white lines. Similar lesions are also seen on the vulva.
                                           Examination of the buccal mucosa reveals a white, lacelike pattern. A representative
                                           image of the wrist lesion is shown in Figure 2-3.

DE RMATOLOGY

                                           FIGURE 2-3.          (Reproduced, with permission, from Wolff K, Johnson RA, Suurmond D.
                                           Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                           2005: Fig. 7-4.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?           Lichen planus. Lichen planus is a cell-mediated inﬂammatory disease
                                                              that involves the skin and mucous membranes.

                What is the epidemiology of this             Lichen planus has been reported in 1% of new patient visits at health
                 condition?                                   clinics. It affects men and women equally and has no predilection for
                                                              race. More than two-thirds of patients are aged 30–60 years, but it can
                                                              affect any age.
                What are the clinical                        Lichen planus is characterized by ﬂat-topped, polygonal, sharply
                 manifestations of this condition?            deﬁned, pruritic, violaceous papules that are grouped together and
                                                              conﬂuent. The papules are generally found on the inner wrists and
                                                              lower legs. A network of ﬁne white lines on the surface of the papules
                                                              or plaques (Wickham’s striae) is also seen. The mucosal surfaces
                                                              frequently display a reticulate white hyperkeratosis. The skin, nails,
                                                              mucous membranes, vulva, and penis are the most commonly affected
                                                              areas. Remember the “4 P’s” of lichen planus: Polygonal, Purple,
                                                              Pruritic Papules.

               54
 What conditions should be          The diagnosis of lichen planus is generally based on the clinical
  included in the differential       appearance of lesions in characteristic locations. Other similar
  diagnosis?                         conditions include:
                                      Drug-related lichenoid eruptions: the offending agent should be
                                       removed.
                                      Chronic graft-versus-host disease: can produce a lichenoid reaction
                                       similar to lichen planus.
                                      Secondary syphilis: the white, lacelike patterns on the buccal mucosa
                                       or genitalia are absent in secondary syphilis.
 What disease(s) are associated     Lichen planus is strongly associated with hepatitis C viral infection,
  with this condition?               chronic active hepatitis, and primary biliary cirrhosis.
 What are typical ﬁndings on skin   The epidermis is hyperkeratotic, with irregular acanthosis and
  biopsy?                            focal thickening in the granular layer. Degenerative keratinocytes
                                     known as Civatte bodies are found in the lower epidermis. Direct
                                     immunoﬂuorescence reveals globular deposits of IgM and complement
                                     mixed with apoptotic keratinocytes.
 What are possible complications    Potential complications include a high rate of recurrence and possible
  from this condition?               neoplastic degeneration in oral lesions. Hypertrophic lesions may also
                                     leave residual areas of hyperpigmentation.
 What are the treatment options     Treatment options include topical steroids and oral antihistamines
  for this condition?                for the itch. In more severe cases, cyclosporine, oral retinoids, oral
                                     prednisone, or PUVA may be necessary.

                                                                                                                   DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                              55
                CASE 10                   A 4-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician’s ofﬁce by his mother for “bumps” on the
                                           child’s abdomen that have been present for over a month. The mother reports ﬁrst
                                           noticing the lesions shortly after the child started attending day care. She has tried a
                                           variety of topical over-the-counter medications, but nothing has helped. She is
                                           concerned because the lesions seem to be increasing in number and spreading across
                                           the child’s abdomen. The child is otherwise healthy. On physical examination, the
                                           child is well appearing. Multiple 2- to 5-mm dome-shaped, shiny papules, most with a
                                           central umbilication are observed on the child’s abdomen (Figure 2-4). Two similar
                                           lesions are also observed around the child’s left eye.

DE RMATOLOGY

                                           FIGURE 2-4.         (Reprinted, with permission, from Wolff K, Johnson RA, Suurmond D.
                                           Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                           2005: Fig. 25-1.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Molluscum contagiosum. Lesions of molluscum contagiosum are
                                                           single or more often multiple rounded, dome-shaped, waxy papules
                                                           2–5 mm in diameter. They are umbilicated and contain a caseous
                                                           plug. This condition is common throughout the United States and
                                                           accounts for 1% of all skin disorders diagnosed; incidence is higher in
                                                           HIV-infected individuals.

                What is the pathophysiology of            Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a poxvirus infection. Viral
                 this condition?                           replication occurs within the cytoplasm, leading to characteristic
                                                           intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies known as Henderson-Paterson bodies
                                                           or molluscum bodies. The virus is spread by direct skin contact or by
                                                           autoinoculation through scratching or touching a lesion.

               56
 How does this condition present?     In children, it commonly occurs on the trunk, arms, face, and legs, while
                                       in immunocompetent adults, lesions are generally found in the perianal
                                       and perigenital regions and are considered to be sexually transmitted. In
                                       immunocompromised children or adults with HIV/AIDS; for example,
                                       lesions tend to be larger, more numerous, and more widespread.
 How is the diagnosis made?           The diagnosis is generally clinical and based on the characteristic
                                       appearance of the lesions. In addition, applying Giemsa or Wright’s
                                       stain to the expressed contents of a papule reveals characteristic
                                       Henderson-Paterson bodies.
 What are the treatment options       In adults, treatment options include curettage, cryotherapy, or
  for this condition?                  laser therapy though most lesions need only be treated for cosmetic
                                       purposes. Lesions in the genital regions should be treated to prevent
                                       further spread via sexual contact. In children, the chemical blistering
                                       agent cantharidin may be a better option due to its ease of application,
                                       although it should not be used around the eye. HIV/AIDS patients
                                       should be placed on antiretroviral therapy as well to aid in eradication
                                       of the infection.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Molluscum contagiosum is generally a self-limited infection in
  with this condition?                 immunocompetent individuals and should resolve in a few months
                                       with no sequelae. In HIV/AIDS patients, the infection may have a
                                       longer course and lead to superinfection and conspicuous cosmetic
                                       deformities with psychological effects.

                                                                                                                   DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                             57
                CASE 11                    A 52-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of sores in his
                                            mouth, axillae, and on his chest. He states that the sores on his chest and axillae start as
                                            blisters but tend to break open when rubbed or if pressure is applied to them. The patient
                                            also reports recent weight loss and overall malaise. His oral intake has been limited by
                                            pain. On physical examination, the patient is tired appearing with scattered erosions over
                                            his axillae and trunk. There are also visible erosions in the oropharynx. No bullae are
                                            observed. When pressure is applied to the skin with a sliding motion, the skin rubs off.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Pemphigus. Pemphigus has three primary subtypes: vulgaris (the
                                                           most common form, 70%), pemphigus foliaceous, and paraneoplastic
                                                           pemphigus. It is an uncommon disease, with frequency depending on
                                                           the population studied; mean age of onset is 50–60 years.

                What is the pathophysiology of            Pemphigus is characterized by shallow, painful erosions and blisters
                 this condition?                           on the skin and mucosal surfaces that easily rupture with friction or
                                                           pressure (Nikolsky’s sign). The disease is caused by autoantibodies against
                                                           desmocollins and desmogleins (transmembrane desmosomal proteins) in
                                                           the epidermis that disrupt cell-cell interactions and lead to blistering.
                What are the typical skin biopsy          Histopathology shows an intraepidermal blister, acantholysis, and
                 ﬁndings in this condition?                suprabasal separation of the epidermis, leaving a row of basal cells
                                                           attached to the basal membrane. Direct immunoﬂuorescence staining
                                                           of the skin biopsy reveals IgG autoantibodies surrounding the perimeter
                                                           of the keratinocytes.

DE RMATOLOGY
                What conditions should be                 In cases in which oral erosions predominate, the differential should
                 included in the differential              include:
                 diagnosis?                                 Aphthae
                                                            Erythema multiforme
                                                            Herpes simplex virus
                                                            Lichen planus

                                                           In cases in which widespread erosions predominate, the differential
                                                           should include:
                                                            Impetigo
                                                            Pyoderma
                                                            Toxic epidermal necrolysis
                                                            Other bullous conditions (see Table 2-1)

                What is the most appropriate              The lesions should be treated as burns, and the patient given oral
                 treatment for this condition?             steroids that must be continued to prevent recurrence of the disease.
                                                           Other agents such as azathioprine or cyclophosphamide may be used
                                                           in conjunction with steroids to decrease the steroid dose and lessen the
                                                           side effects related to high-dose steroids. In severe cases, plasmapheresis
                                                           may be required.

               58
TA B L E 2 - 1 .   Differentiation of Pemphigus from Bullous Pemphigus

                                   PEMPHIGUS                    BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID

   Location                        Mucous membranes, skin       Always the skin, usually the arms and thighs, rarely mucous
                                                                membranes

   Autoantibody target             Desmocollins, desmogleins    BP1 and BP2

   Location of autoantibodies      Intercellular                Epidermal-dermal junction

   Location of blister             Intraepidermal, shallow      Subepidermal, deep

   Nikolsky’s sign                 Positive                     Negative

   Symptoms                        Painful                      Itchy

                                                                                                                                   DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                                              59
                CASE 12                    An 18-year-old black man visits his primary care physician because of a rash he has
                                            noticed over the past few days that continues to spread. On further questioning, the man
                                            mentions he noticed a pinkish, oval area on his chest that ﬁrst appeared 2 weeks prior.
                                            On physical examination, the patient is healthy and well appearing. Examination of his
                                            skin reveals a crop of small, oval macules with a peripheral rim of scale, scattered over
                                            the trunk in a “Christmas tree pattern.” The area where the ﬁrst patch appeared has an
                                            area of central clearing with a cigarette paper–like scale. The patient’s rash is shown in
                                            Figure 2-5.

DE RMATOLOGY
                                           FIGURE 2-5.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS,
                                           Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson LJ, Isselbacher KJ, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
                                           cine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 47-6.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Pityriasis rosea. Pityriasis rosea is an acute eruption thought to be viral
                                                           in etiology.

                What is the epidemiology of this          Pityriasis rosea commonly occurs in clusters, with seasonal predilection
                 condition?                                to spring and autumn. It affects older children and young adults and
                                                           is somewhat more common in females than males. It has a low rate of
                                                           reoccurrence.
                What is the natural history of this       Pityriasis rosea generally begins with a “herald” patch. The herald
                 condition?                                patch is a single, round or oval, salmon-colored patch or plaque that
                                                           appears on the neck, chest, or back several days or weeks before the
                                                           rest of the lesions develop. The herald patch then becomes scaly with
                                                           a cigarette paper–like scale and begins to clear centrally. Following the
                                                           appearance of the herald patch, crops of smaller, oval macules or small
                                                           patches begin to develop. These lesions generally appear over the trunk
                                                           and proximal extremities. They generally spread from the top down.
                                                           The symmetrical appearance of these lesions along cleavage lines gives
                                                           rise to the description of this rash as a “Christmas tree pattern.”

               60
 What conditions should be          Secondary syphilis
  included in the differential       Drug eruptions
  diagnosis?                         HIV seroconversion illness
                                     Lyme disease
                                     Psoriasis
                                     Tinea corporis

 Which viruses have been           Human herpesvirus 6 and human herpesvirus 7 have been associated
  associated with this condition?   with this condition in some cases.
 How is the diagnosis made?        The diagnosis of pityriasis rosea is relatively easy to make clinically.
                                    A history of a herald patch and the characteristic morphology and
                                    distribution of the skin lesions support the diagnosis. The lack of
                                    symptoms other than pruritus lends further support to the diagnosis of
                                    pityriasis rosea. All patients with suspected pityriasis rosea should have
                                    an RPR or VDRL serologic test to rule out syphilis.
 What is the most appropriate      Treatment is generally not needed. Midpotency topical steroids can
  treatment for this condition?     be used to control the itching. For more severe or refractory cases,
                                    phototherapy may be helpful.

                                                                                                                 DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                            61
                CASE 13                   A 19-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of a rash on
                                           the extensor surfaces of his elbows and knees. The patient has no past medical history
                                           and is otherwise healthy. On physical examination, the patient’s vital signs are normal.
                                           Well-demarcated, dark red plaques with silvery-white scales are present on the extensor
                                           surfaces of the elbows and knees bilaterally. Examination of the nails reveals the
                                           presence of pitting. A representative image is shown in Figure 2-6.

DE RMATOLOGY                               FIGURE 2-6.         (Reproduced, with permission, from Wolff K, Johnson RA, Suurmond D.
                                           Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                           2005: Fig. 3-2.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?           Psoriasis. Psoriasis is a chronic, noncontagious, multisystem,
                                                              inﬂammatory disorder that manifests itself on extensor skin surfaces
                                                              and tends to wax and wane depending on systemic and environmental
                                                              factors such as stress and infection. Plaque psoriasis is the most
                                                              common type, presenting with focal, raised, inﬂamed, edematous
                                                              plaques on the scalp, trunk, and limbs, often covered with a silvery
                                                              scale. Almost 20% of patients will have an oligoarticular arthritis.

                What is the epidemiology of this             Psoriasis is a relatively common condition that affects 2–2.6% of the
                 condition?                                   United States population. Caucasians are more commonly affected
                                                              than African-Americans and women more than men, with a median
                                                              onset at 28 years of age. It is also less common in the tropics as opposed
                                                              to more northern climates.
                What is the pathogenesis of this             Psoriasis is a T cell–mediated inﬂammatory disorder that leads to
                 condition?                                   epidermal hyperproliferation. Various cytokines have been implicated
                                                              in the pathogenesis, including TNF-α.

               62
 How is the diagnosis made?          The diagnosis of psoriasis is typically made clinically by the
                                      characteristic ﬁndings on skin examination. Occasionally, a skin biopsy
                                      is necessary for a deﬁnitive diagnosis. The biopsy ﬁndings include
                                      acanthosis (increased thickness of the stratum spinosum), parakeratosis
                                      (retained nuclei in the stratum corneum cells), and Monro’s
                                      microabscesses (collections of neutrophils in the stratum corneum).
 What are the clinical subtypes of    Guttate psoriasis
  this condition?                      Inverse psoriasis
                                       Nail psoriasis
                                       Plaque psoriasis
                                       Pustular psoriasis
                                       Erythrodermic psoriasis

 What is the most appropriate        Mild to moderate psoriasis can be treated with topical corticosteroids,
  treatment for this condition?       topical calcipotrene, and adjuncts such as stress reduction,
                                      moisturizers, and salicylic acid as a scale-removing agent. Phototherapy
                                      may also be helpful. More severe cases of psoriasis should be treated
                                      with systemic agents such as methotrexate, acitretin, or cyclosporine.
                                      Immunomodulatory agents such as inﬂiximab and etanercept are
                                      alternative choices for severe cases especially for those with arthritis.

                                                                                                                  DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                            63
                CASE 14                   A 35-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of ﬂulike
                                           symptoms, sores in her mouth, and a rash on her chest and arms. She also complains
                                           of painful skin. She denies any drug allergies, but she does report recently starting
                                           a new antiseizure mediation for her epilepsy. On physical examination, the patient
                                           is febrile, with blood pressure of 125/85 mm Hg and pulse of 100/min. A symmetric
                                           eruption of targetoid patches, many with central vesicles, is present over the chest,
                                           arms, and face.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS). Stevens-Johnson syndrome is an
                                                         exfoliative mucocutaneous disease that may be life threatening. A
                                                         Caucasian predominance has been reported, along with a male-to-
                                                         female ratio of 2:1. Most patients are in their second to fourth decades
                                                         of life.

                What is the pathophysiology of          The syndrome is an immune complex–mediated hypersensitivity
                 this condition?                         disorder that can be caused by many drugs (penicillins, sulfas, and
                                                         anticonvulsants), Mycoplasma pneumoniae, viral infections (HSV), or
                                                         malignancies; it may also be idiopathic. Cell death results in separation
                                                         of the epidermis from the dermis. The death receptor, Fas, and its
                                                         ligand, FasL, as well as inﬂammatory cytokines have been linked to this
                                                         disorder.
                How is the diagnosis made?              The diagnosis of SJS is primarily a clinical diagnosis made by the
                                                         characteristic targetoid patches or plaques often studded with vesicles

DE RMATOLOGY
                                                         on less than 10% of the skin surface and mucous membranes. In
                                                         more difﬁcult cases, skin biopsy can be performed. The biopsy shows
                                                         perivascular mononuclear inﬁltrates with eosinophils in the papillary
                                                         dermis. Degeneration of the basal layer may also be seen with
                                                         subepidermal blister formation in more severe cases.
                What possible complications are         The major potential complications of SJS are ﬂuid-electrolyte
                 associated with this condition?         imbalances from transepidermal ﬂuid losses. Superimposed bacterial
                                                         infections may lead to sepsis and, in severe cases, death.
                What is the most appropriate            The patient should be treated similarly to a burn patient, with careful
                 treatment for this condition?           monitoring of ﬂuid and electrolyte balance. Treatment of SJS depends
                                                         on early diagnosis and removal of the offending agent or identiﬁcation
                                                         and treatment of the underlying disease. Corticosteroids should be
                                                         used with caution, but may be helpful in early cases. In severe cases of
                                                         SJS, intravenous γ-globulin may be used, although there is conﬂicting
                                                         data on its efﬁcacy.
                This condition is considered to         See Table 2-2.
                 be part of a continuum with two
                 other conditions. How do all three
                 conditions compare?

               64
TA B L E 2 - 2 .   Erythema Multiforme, SJS, and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis

                                          ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME          SJS*                        TOXIC EPIDERMAL NECROLYSIS

   % Body surface area involvement        < 10%                        < 10%                       > 30% or sheets of
                                                                                                   denuded skin

   Cutaneous vs. mucosal involvement      Usually involves only skin   Involves skin and mucosa    Involves skin and mucosa

*Patients with 10–30% involvement are classiﬁed as having SJS-TEN overlap with intermediate prognosis.

                                                                                                                                   DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                                              65
                CASE 15                   A 65-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of severe pain
                                           on the left side of his trunk. In addition to the pain, he complains of a rash that extends
                                           from the right side of his midback to the right side of his abdomen. He reports feeling
                                           ill a few days prior to developing the rash. On physical examination, the patient appears
                                           uncomfortable and in pain. Examination of the skin reveals grouped vesicles on an
                                           erythematous base in a unilateral dermatomal distribution along the patient’s trunk, as
                                           shown in Figure 2-7.

DE RMATOLOGY
                                           F I G U R E 2 - 7.    (Reproduced, with permission, from Wolff K, Johnson RA, Suurmond D.
                                           Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                           2005: Fig. 25-41.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?             Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection (also known as herpes zoster
                                                                or shingles). The virus is a double-stranded DNA virus of the
                                                                Herpesviridae family.

                What is the epidemiology of this               The incidence of herpes zoster appears to increase with age, with the
                 condition?                                     majority of cases occurring in individuals older than the age of 55. It
                                                                has no predilection for race or gender; however, immunocompromised
                                                                individuals are more susceptible to the condition. A herpes zoster
                                                                vaccine for older adults has proven successful in reducing the
                                                                incidence of disease.
                What is the pathophysiology of                 Primary infection with VZV occurs when contact with the mucosa of
                 this condition?                                the respiratory tract or conjunctiva results in chickenpox. The virus
                                                                then lies dormant in the sensory dorsal root ganglia. This dormancy
                                                                may be permanent or may become reactivated during conditions of
                                                                decreased cellular immunity, resulting in herpes zoster.
                What are the clinical                          Reactivation leading to herpes zoster is characterized by a prodrome of
                 manifestations of this condition?              fever, dysesthesias, malaise, and headache that precedes the vesicular
                                                                eruption by a few days. Grouped vesicles develop unilaterally along any
                                                                dermatome including the face; these lesions tend to crust over within
                                                                7–10 days at which point they are no longer infectious. Full resolution
                                                                occurs in 3–4 weeks. Pain is the most common symptom and may
                                                                both precede the rash and continue after it resolves for several months
                                                                (postherpetic neuralgia).

               66
 How is the diagnosis made?        The diagnosis of herpes zoster should be made clinically. However,
                                    if the diagnosis is uncertain, a viral culture or Tzanck smear can be
                                    performed to look for multinucleated giant cells.
 What possible complications are    Bacterial superinfection.
  associated with this condition?    Herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay Hunt syndrome)—the triad of
                                      ipsilateral facial paralysis, ear pain, and vesicles in the auditory canal
                                      and auricle.
                                     Meningitis.
                                     Motor neuropathy.
                                     Ocular complications (uveitis, keratitis) when the ophthalmic branch
                                      of the trigeminal cranial nerve is affected.
                                     Postherpetic neuralgia.
                                     Immunosuppressed hosts have an increased risk for severe
                                      complications related to VZV.

                                                                                                                   DE RMATOLOGY

                                                                                                             67
                CASE 16                    A 15-year-old girl presents to a pediatric dermatologist with small pink papules over her
                                            nose and cheeks. She has had the papules for some time and has been treating them
                                            like acne. The papules have not resolved despite a number of different acne treatments.
                                            She also complains of a rough patch of skin on her lower back that she has had for as
                                            long as she can remember. On physical examination, multiple small, pink papules
                                            are observed in a nasolabial distribution on the face. A cobblestone textured plaque
                                            with an orange peel–like surface is observed on the lumbosacral region. A total of four
                                            hypopigmented, ﬂame-shaped macules are scattered over the trunk and extremities.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Tuberous sclerosis (TS). The physical ﬁndings of angioﬁbromas (the
                                                           pink papules), a shagreen patch (connective tissue nevus with orange
                                                           peel consistency), periungal ﬁbromas, and three or more ash-leaf spots
                                                           (hypopigmented macules) are consistent with a diagnosis of tuberous
                                                           sclerosis. Tuberous sclerosis is one of the neurocutaneous syndromes
                                                           (also included are neuroﬁbromatosis 1 and neuroﬁbromatosis 2). TS
                                                           has a highly variable clinical course. The symptoms associated with TS
                                                           are due to small, benign tumors that grow on many organs including
                                                           the skin, eyes, brain, and kidneys.

                What are some of the other                 Neurologic: seizures, infantile spasms (seizures beginning in the ﬁrst
                 clinical manifestations of this             year of life), mental retardation.
                 condition?                                 Cardiac: rhabdomyomas.
                                                            Ophthalmologic: retinal lesions including mulberry tumors,
                                                             phakomas.

DE RMATOLOGY
                                                            Renal: hamartomas or polycystic disease.
                                                            Pulmonary: angiomyolipomas leading to cystic or ﬁbrous changes.

                What is the etiology of this              TS is an autosomal-dominant condition, although only one-third of
                 condition?                                cases are familial. Spontaneous mutations or mosaicism account for the
                                                           nonfamilial cases. TS is thought to result from mutations in either the
                                                           TSC1 gene on chromosome 9q34 or the TSC2 gene on chromosome
                                                           16p13.3. TSC1 codes for the hamartin protein, while TSC2 codes
                                                           for the tuberin protein. Tuberin and hamartin are thought to form a
                                                           protein complex that acts as a negative regulator of the cell cycle.
                What are the typical CT scan              The classic ﬁndings on CT scan of the head of a patient with tuberous
                 ﬁndings in this condition?                sclerosis are calciﬁed tubers in the periventricular region. The tubers
                                                           are considered hamartomatous in nature and may be referred to as
                                                           glioneuronal hamartomas. The lesions may rarely transform into
                                                           malignant astrocytomas.
                What are the recommendations              Patients with TS with no potentially serious problems should have
                 for follow-up of patients with this       annual follow-up visits that include physical examination, ophthalmic
                 condition?                                and funduscopic examinations, growth evaluation, assessment of
                                                           development, and evaluation of school progress. Renal ultrasound
                                                           should be performed at the time of initial diagnosis and every 1–3 years
                                                           beginning at adolescence. CT scan of the abdomen or MRI should be
                                                           performed if any major changes develop. Head CT or MRI should be
                                                           performed every 1–3 years. Patients with an identiﬁed cardiac
                                                           rhabdomyoma should be followed by cardiology.

               68
 CASE 17                    An 85-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with trouble walking. He
                             states that over the past several weeks he has been having considerable pain around the
                             toes of his right foot whenever he stands. This same pain makes it impossible for him
                             to play in his daily racquetball matches with colleagues. Physical examination reveals
                             a healthy-looking male who appears younger than his stated age. A powerful odor is
                             present when he removes his athletic shoes. The rest of the exam is normal except for
                             brown, thick, opaciﬁed nail plates on three of the ﬁve toes on his right foot that cause
                             him pain when touched.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Onychomycosis. Onychomycosis (OM) refers to a fungal infection
                                           that affects the toenails or ﬁngernails. The fungus may involve any
                                           component of the nail unit, including the nail matrix, nail bed, or nail
                                           plate. Fortunately, this condition is not life threatening, but it can cause
                                           pain, discomfort, and serious physical and functional limitations.

 What is the epidemiology of this         The incidence of OM in North America is reported between 2–13%,
  condition?                               with a recent increase that can be traced to a large immigration of
                                           dermatophytes, especially Trichophyton rubrum from West Africa and
                                           Southeast Asia. OM affects all races. Men are typically more affected
                                           than women; however, candidal infections affect women more often
                                           than men. Adults are 30 times more likely to have OM than children,
                                           with as many as 90% of cases occurring in elderly people.
 How is this condition classiﬁed?          Distal lateral subungual OM: most common form; thickened,

                                                                                                                          DE RMATOLOGY
                                             opaciﬁed nail plate, discolored white to brown; subungual
                                             hyperkeratosis: onycholysis; edge of the nail becomes severely
                                             eroded.
                                            White superﬁcial OM: white speckled powdery patches on the nail
                                             plate; nail becomes roughened and crumbles easily.
                                            Proximal subungual OM: nail plate becomes white proximally and
                                             normal distally; leukonychia in proximal nail fold.
                                            Candidal OM: erythematous swelling of the nail fold or separation of
                                             the nail plate from its bed.
 What risk factors are associated         Risk factors for OM include a family history, increasing age, poor
  with an increased incidence of           health, prior trauma, warm climate, participation in sports or exercise,
  this condition?                          immunosuppression, communal bathing, or occlusive footwear.
 What tests could be used to              Clinical features of OM are usually diagnostic; however, direct
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    microscopy of a nail sample in KOH solution can help identify the
                                           presence of fungi. To identify the speciﬁc pathogen, a fungal culture
                                           can be prepared.
 What is the most appropriate             Topical agents should only be used in patients unable to take
  treatment for this condition?            systemic treatment; alone, these treatments are unable to penetrate
                                           all layers of the nail plate. Old oral medications such as griseofulvin
                                           and ketoconazole have been replaced with the more efﬁcacious
                                           itraconazole and terbinaﬁne, which penetrate the nail plate within days
                                           of starting therapy.
 What is the prognosis for patients       Studies suggest that a 75% cure rate is possible with oral medications,
  with this condition?                     but this has been hard to measure. Regardless, fungal infections of
                                           the ﬁngernails have a much more favorable prognosis than fungal
                                           infections of the toenails.

                                                                                                                   69
                CASE 18                    A 52-year-old white man presents to the dermatologist after his wife noticed a dark,
                                            bleeding lesion on his back. The patient was unaware of the lesion until his wife
                                            pointed it out; she reports ﬁrst noticing it a few months prior. The lesion has since
                                            changed shape, and she grew more concerned when she noticed it bleeding. The
                                            patient reports that he used to spend summers working as a lifeguard when he was
                                            much younger and rarely used sunblock. On physical examination, a 7-mm asymmetric
                                            macule with irregular borders and nonuniform color is observed on the right upper
                                            back.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Melanoma. A changing, asymmetric pigmented lesion with irregular
                                                          borders, color variegation, and a diameter > 6 mm should make one
                                                          think of melanoma. Lesions are commonly found on the trunk in
                                                          men and on the legs in women. While accounting for 4% of all skin
                                                          cancers, it accounts for 74% of all skin cancer deaths. Lesions generally
                                                          occur as solitary lesions, and up to 50% arise from normal-appearing
                                                          skin. The ABCDEs of melanoma stand for Asymmetric shape, Border
                                                          irregularities, Color variegation, Diameter > 6 mm, and Enlargement.

                What risk factors are associated          Excessive sun exposure
                 with an increased incidence of            Sun-sensitive skin (fair skin)
                 this condition?                           Family history of melanoma or dysplastic nevus syndrome
                                                           Xeroderma pigmentosum
                                                           Large number of nevi (common or atypical)
                                                           Dysplastic nevi

DE RMATOLOGY
                                                          The Fitzpatrick mnemonic for melanoma risk (MMRISK) is:
                                                           Moles: atypical (atypical nevus) (> 5)
                                                           Moles: common moles (numerous, > 50)
                                                           Red hair and freckling (often these persons have few or no moles)
                                                           Inability to tan: Fitzpatrick skin phototypes I (always burns, never
                                                            tans) and II (always burns, minimal tan)
                                                           Sunburn: severe sunburn, especially before age 14
                                                           Kindred: family history of melanoma

                What are the subtypes of this             Superﬁcial spreading: 70% of all melanomas.
                 condition?                                Nodular: arises rapidly, “blueberry-like” nodules.
                                                           Acral-lentiginous: more common in males, Asians, and African-
                                                            Americans. Appears on palms, soles, mucous membranes, and nails.
                                                           Lentigo maligna: ﬂat, “geographic shape,” occurs in sun-exposed
                                                            areas.
                What test and/or procedure could         When melanoma is suspected, an excisional biopsy should be
                 be used to conﬁrm the diagnosis?         performed to conﬁrm the diagnosis. An incisional biopsy may be
                                                          indicated for large lesions or if the suspicion for melanoma is low.
                What is the most appropriate             After the diagnosis is conﬁrmed, the area should be re-excised with
                 treatment for this condition?            appropriate margins; the recommended margins are based on tumor
                                                          thickness. Sentinel node biopsies are recommended for tumors ≥ 1 mm
                                                          in thickness or with high-risk histology. Adjuvant therapy should be
                                                          considered for patients with a high risk for metastatic disease. Optimal
                                                          adjuvant therapy strategies are still being elucidated, but options include
                                                          interferon-α or melanoma vaccines. Melanoma vaccines are being
                                                          tested in clinical trials. Systemic chemotherapy should be initiated for
                                                          metastatic disease.

               70
Endocrinology

Case 1           72

Case 2           74

Case 3           76

Case 4           77

Case 5           78

Case 6           79

Case 7          80

Case 8          82

Case 9          84

Case 10         85

Case 11         86

Case 12         88

Case 13         89

Case 14         90

Case 15         92

Case 16         94

Case 17         96

Case 18         98

Case 19         100

                      71
                     CASE 1                     A 45-year-old man presents to his primary care physician accompanied by his wife
                                                 complaining of recurrent headaches for the past 3 months. He has experienced at
                                                 least two headaches a week and rates the pain 7–8 out of 10. The headaches occur
                                                 at all times of the day. Sometimes the pain is accompanied by loss of peripheral
                                                 vision; however, the patient notes that he has experienced vision loss in the absence
                                                 of the headaches as well. This winter, he notes that neither his hat nor his gloves ﬁt
                                                 properly anymore. His wife mentions that he stopped wearing his wedding band last
                                                 year because it began to cut off the blood supply. Vital signs include a blood pressure
                                                 of 150/90 mm Hg, heart rate of 82/min, and respiratory rate of 14/min. His physical
                                                 examination is remarkable only for the position of the point of maximal impulse, which
                                                 is along the left midaxillary line at the level of the sixth rib.

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Acromegaly, which results from autonomous hypersecretion of growth
                                                               hormone (GH). Overt symptoms commonly include enlargement
                                                               of the extremities (Figure 3-1), tongue, and other connective tissues.
                                                               However, the disease has numerous physiologic complications. The
                                                               diagnosis is often missed, because extremely high GH levels can be
                                                               associated with exercise prior to the test, a nonfasting sample, hepatic
                                                               or renal failure, poor nutrition, diabetes, or treatment with estrogens,
                                                               β-blockers, or clonidine. To remember the common symptoms and
                                                               complications, think of the ABCDEF of acromegaly: Arthralgia/
                                                               Arthritis, Blood pressure raised, Carpal tunnel syndrome, Diabetes,
                                                               Enlarged organs, and visual Field defect.

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                     What is the pathogenesis of this         Acromegaly is caused by unregulated autonomous overproduction
                      condition?                               of GH by the somatotroph cells of the anterior pituitary. In the vast
                                                               majority of cases, this overproduction results from the presence of a
                                                               pituitary adenoma. Excess GH in the bloodstream leads to increased
                                                               production of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) by the liver,
                                                               which in turn stimulates bone proliferation and generalized tissue
                                                               hypertrophy. Under normal conditions, IGF-1 inhibits GH release
                                                               from the pituitary.
                     What is the next step in                 Once a patient is suspected of having acromegaly, the next step is
                      management?                              measurement of both serum GH concentration after a glucose load
                                                               and IGF-1. Because GH levels ﬂuctuate widely over the course of a
                                                               day and increase in response to fasting, a random or fasting glucose is
                                                               not helpful.
                                                               An oral glucose load prior to GH measurement is given because it
                                                               suppresses serum GH levels to < 2 ng/mL in healthy subjects but will
                                                               not change GH levels in acromegaly patients. IGF-1 (once corrected
                                                               for age) is the single best test for the diagnosis of acromegaly. Once
                                                               acromegaly has been conﬁrmed, the next step is MRI of the pituitary.

                    72
 What is the most appropriate    Treatment of acromegaly is aimed at symptomatic relief, restoration
  treatment for this condition?   of normal pituitary function, preservation of surrounding brain tissue,
                                  and normalization of serum GH levels. Management options include
                                  surgery, medications, and radiation. Transsphenoidal resection of the
                                  adenoma is often rapidly effective in reducing pressure on surrounding
                                  brain structures and restoring serum GH levels to the normal range.
                                  However, for tumors > 10 mm in diameter or for patients with GH
                                  levels > 40 ng/mL, medications should be prescribed to shrink the
                                  adenoma. Both bromocriptine and octreotide (synthetic somatostatin)
                                  can be used. Radiation can be used as an adjunct for patients with
                                  complex tumor margins; total resection of the adenoma may not be
                                  possible in these individuals.

                                                                                                                   E N DOC RI NOLOGY

                                  FIGURE 3-1.       Markedly increased soft tissue bulk and blunt ﬁngers in
                                  a middle-aged man with acromegaly. (Reproduced, with permission, from
                                  Greenspan FS, Gardner DG. Basic and Clinical Endocrinology, 7th ed. New
                                  York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 5-19.)

                                                                                                              73
                     CASE 2                     A 29-year-old woman presents to her gynecologist for her annual examination. She has
                                                 been having irregular menstrual cycles for the past 2 years; the intervals between her
                                                 periods have extended as long as 3 or 4 months. She denies painful cramps but notes
                                                 that the periods are heavier than before the irregularity began. She and her husband
                                                 have been trying to conceive for the past year but have not been successful. She denies
                                                 pain during intercourse. She notes that she has been gaining weight for the past year,
                                                 estimating that she is nearly 9.1 kg (20 lb) heavier than she was at her last annual
                                                 checkup. Upon examination, she is 160 cm (5′3′′) tall and weighs 77 kg (170 lb).
                                                 Her face is round and ﬂushed, and her weight is concentrated around her abdomen;
                                                 her arms and legs are comparatively thinner. Her breast and pelvic examinations are
                                                 unremarkable, with the exception of thick, reddish-purple streaks around her breasts.

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Cushing’s syndrome. Cushing’s syndrome refers to the group of
                                                               signs and symptoms associated with abnormally elevated levels
                                                               of corticosteroids, whether from exogenous glucocorticoids (e.g.,
                                                               iatrogenic) or from conditions associated with overproduction of
                                                               cortisol or ACTH. Cushing’s syndrome is ﬁve times more common
                                                               in females than in males. Cushing’s must be distinguished from
                                                               other causes of hypercortisolism (alcohol abuse, depression, anorexia
                                                               nervosa) as well as from familial syndromes and other conditions that
                                                               share some of the symptoms (polycystic ovarian syndrome, ovarian
                                                               tumors, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, genetic predisposition to
                                                               rotund body type). If left untreated, Cushing’s syndrome can lead to

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               numerous complications, including hypertension, diabetes, severe
                                                               infections, disability due to fracture and necrosis of the femoral head,
                                                               and psychosis.

                     What signs and symptoms are              In order of decreasing frequency:
                      characteristic of this condition?         Central obesity, including moon facies and buffalo hump.
                                                                Facial plethora.
                                                                Glucose intolerance.
                                                                Muscle weakness.
                                                                Hypertension.
                                                                Psychological changes (irritability, anxiety, depression).
                                                                Dermatological changes (easy bruisability, acne, oily skin, and purple
                                                                 striae on abdomen, thighs and/or breasts).
                                                                Hirsutism.
                                                                Oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea.
                                                                Impotence.
                                                                Ankle edema.
                                                                Bone weakness (often leading to backache and vertebral fractures).

                     What is the pathogenesis of this         There are multiple possible causes. Approximately half of patients with
                      condition?                               Cushing’s syndrome have Cushing’s disease, in which the anterior
                                                               pituitary oversecretes ACTH due to a small benign pituitary adenoma
                                                               (typically < 5 mm in diameter). One-third of cases can be traced to a
                                                               unilateral adrenal tumor and are independent of ACTH stimulation.
                                                               Less commonly, Cushing’s syndrome is caused by ectopic sources
                                                               of ACTH, such as small cell carcinoma of the lung. Remember: in
                                                               Cushing’s, you have plenty of Cortisol, whereas Addison’s causes
                                                               Autoimmune destruction of the adrenals.

                    74
 What tests and/or imaging tools   Hypercortisolism can most easily be detected with a dexamethasone
  could be used to conﬁrm the       challenge, in which 1 mg is administered orally around 11 P.M., and
  diagnosis?                        serum cortisol is collected at 8 A.M. the following morning. A serum
                                    cortisol level < 5 μg/dL almost conclusively rules out Cushing’s
                                    syndrome. However, antiseizure drugs and estrogens can cause a
                                    false-positive result. Hypercortisolism can be further conﬁrmed with
                                    an elevated 24-hour urine cortisol level, followed by a plasma ACTH
                                    measurement. ACTH levels < 20 pg/mL are suggestive of an adrenal
                                    tumor, while higher levels indicate pituitary or ectopic sources of
                                    ACTH. If the syndrome is determined to be ACTH dependent, a
                                    pituitary tumor will be apparent on ~50% of MRI scans. CT scanning
                                    is used to search for ectopic sources of ACTH and shows the source in
                                    60% of cases.
 What is the most appropriate      Patients with Cushing’s disease respond best to transsphenoidal
  treatment for this condition?     resection of the pituitary adenoma. In most cases, the rest of the
                                    pituitary resumes normal function; however, some patients may require
                                    hydrocortisone replacement therapy. Adrenal adenomas are treated
                                    with unilateral adrenalectomy.

                                                                                                            E N DOC RI NOLOGY

                                                                                                       75
                     CASE 3                    A 40-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with a month-long history
                                                of fatigue, light-headedness, and muscle weakness. He notes decreased appetite and
                                                a 4.5-kg (10-lb) weight loss over this time, as well as darkening of his skin, particularly
                                                over his appendectomy scar, his knuckles, his belt line, and both knees. The light-
                                                headedness is particularly severe when he gets out of bed in the morning or rises from
                                                a seated position. Throughout the interview, the patient appears irritable and agitated.
                                                His blood pressure is 115/70 mm Hg supine and 90/60 mm Hg standing. Relevant
                                                laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                WBC count: 11,000/mm3
                                                Absolute neutrophil count: 620/mm3
                                                Total eosinophil count: 475/μL
                                                Serum Na+: 125 mEq/L
                                                Serum K+: 5.9 mEq/L
                                                Serum glucose: 64 mg/dL (fasting)

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       A history of fatigue, malaise, generalized weakness, decreased
                                                               appetite, and/or weight loss is concerning for adrenal insufﬁciency
                                                               (primary or secondary), malignancy, intrinsic gastrointestinal disease,
                                                               anorexia nervosa, multiple sclerosis, and AIDS. The presence of
                                                               the following complex of ﬁndings is most consistent with adrenal
                                                               insufﬁciency: hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, hypotension, and moderate
                                                               neutropenia with relative eosinophilia. Further, hyperkalemia and

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               hyperpigmentation suggest a diagnosis of primary (Addison’s disease) as
                                                               opposed to secondary adrenal insufﬁciency.

                     What is the pathogenesis of this         In Addison’s, autoimmune destruction of the adrenal glands renders
                      condition?                               them unable to produce sufﬁcient amounts of cortisol and sometimes
                                                               aldosterone. Cortisol deﬁciency results in hypotension, hypoglycemia,
                                                               neutropenia, and increased levels of ACTH. Elevated ACTH causes
                                                               characteristic hyperpigmentation (not a feature of secondary adrenal
                                                               insufﬁciency caused by pituitary apoplexy). Aldosterone deﬁciency
                                                               (which also does not occur in secondary adrenal insufﬁency) results in
                                                               hyperkalemia and further worsens hypotension. Hyponatremia reﬂects
                                                               increased ADH secretion caused by cortisol deﬁciency.
                     What tests could be used to              Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia are suggestive of the disease. A
                      conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    cosyntropin test, in which synthetic ACTH is administered and a
                                                               serum cortisol is obtained within 1 hour, can be used to conﬁrm the
                                                               diagnosis. When present early in the morning, low cortisol levels
                                                               accompanied by high levels of ACTH are diagnostic. In this patient,
                                                               serum cortisol and plasma ACTH measured around 8 A.M. might
                                                               be 1.2 μ/dL and 350 pg/dL, respectively. Remember: in Cushing’s,
                                                               you have plenty of Cortisol, whereas Addison’s causes Autoimmune
                                                               destruction of the adrenals.
                     What is the most appropriate             Treatment involves replacement of glucocorticoids and
                      treatment for this condition?            mineralocorticoids. In mild cases, oral glucocorticoid replacement is
                                                               sufﬁcient; however, ﬂudrocortisone acetate may be needed to stimulate
                                                               sodium retention.

                    76
 CASE 4                     A healthy 24-year-old woman was involved in an automobile accident, and sustained a
                             fracture of her jaw, multiple facial bone fractures, and a brief loss of consciousness. In
                             the emergency department, an intravenous infusion of 5% dextrose in 0.45% normal
                             saline at 125 mL/hr was started. Twelve hours after admission to the hospital, she was
                             awake and alert but had difﬁculty swallowing and talking because of her injuries, and
                             she complained of extreme thirst. Her urine output was 500–600 mL/hr. Laboratory
                             studies showed that her serum sodium concentration was 156 mEq/L with a plasma
                             osmolality of 320 mOsm/kg. Her urine osmolality was 65 mOsm/kg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Diabetes insipidus (DI). The disease occurs in two forms: central
                                            and nephrogenic; though both are rare, the central (CDI) form is
                                            more common. CDI is caused by damage to the hypothalamus,
                                            posterior pituitary, or the connection between them, usually from
                                            surgery, tumor, infection, or (as in this case) head injury. Whatever
                                            the cause, the lesion disrupts the release of vasopressin, or antidiuretic
                                            hormone (ADH). Without vasopressin, the body is unable to signal
                                            the collecting ducts of the kidneys to reabsorb water from the tubular
                                            ﬁltrate and return it to the bloodstream. Nephrogenic DI, on the other
                                            hand, usually occurs as a result of an inherited defect that renders the
                                            kidneys unable to reabsorb water from the tubules and return it to the
                                            circulation. DI can also occur as a side effect of drugs such as lithium
                                            or amphotericin B, or in association with polycystic kidney disease.

                                                                                                                          E N DOC RI NOLOGY
 What are the usual                        The body normally responds to hypernatremia through renal water
  osmoregulatory responses to               conservation and the sensation of thirst. In contrast, this patient is
  hypernatremia?                            polyuric instead of oliguric, reﬂecting a defect in the kidneys’ ability
                                            to appropriately concentrate urine. She is complaining of thirst, so this
                                            limb of the osmoregulatory system is intact.
 What other conditions should              Polyuria can be due to excessive water intake (primary polydipsia with
  be included in the differential           secondary polyuria) or excessive renal water loss (primary polyuria). The
  diagnosis of polyuria?                    urine osmolality is commonly used to differentiate between these two.
                                            Water diuresis, as in diabetes insipidus, is deﬁned by a urine osmolality
                                            < 150 mOsm/kg. Solute (or osmotic) diuresis, as in diuretic-induced
                                            polyuria, poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, and postobstructive
                                            diuresis, is deﬁned by a urine osmolality > 300 mOsm/kg.
 What type of intravenous ﬂuids            The patient’s free water deﬁcit should be aggressively corrected with
  would be most appropriate for this        electrolyte-free water (5% dextrose in water) until she can resume
  patient?                                  oral water intake. Giving her sodium-containing solutions (e.g.,
                                            normal or half-normal saline) would only exacerbate the polyuria by
                                            superimposing a solute diuresis on the existing water diuresis.
 What other treatment will this            She should receive exogenous vasopressin. Because the clinical
  patient require for the polyuria?         situation may change (within hours to a few days) with the possible
                                            release of ADH stores from necrotic pituitary tissue, she should receive
                                            a short-acting form of the hormone. The preferred choice would be
                                            aqueous vasopressin, which lasts 4–6 hours, delivered subcutaneously
                                            or intramuscularly.

                                                                                                                     77
                     CASE 5                        A 7-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his parents for new-onset bedwetting
                                                    and weight loss. They state that he is eating and drinking more than usual but continues
                                                    to lose weight. He has been using the bathroom more during the day in addition to
                                                    his accidents at night. He has also complained of changes in his vision. On physical
                                                    examination, the child is alert and oriented with stable vital signs; there are no
                                                    abnormal physical ﬁndings. Laboratory tests reveal a plasma glucose of 280 mg/dL.

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?          Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM). This is an autoimmune condition that
                                                                  leads to irreversible destruction of the insulin-producing β cells in
                                                                  the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The resulting insulin deﬁciency
                                                                  manifests as abnormal glucose metabolism, with high plasma and
                                                                  urine glucose levels leading to polydipsia and polyuria, respectively.
                                                                  It typically presents in non-obese children and young adults and is
                                                                  associated with HLA-DR3 and -DR4.

                     What tests could be used to                 In this patient, the random plasma glucose > 200 mg/dL with
                      conﬁrm the diagnosis?                       characteristic symptoms is adequate conﬁrmation. In other
                                                                  circumstances, a fasting (> 8-hour) plasma glucose > 126 mg/dL on
                                                                  two occasions or a two-hour postprandial glucose > 200 mg/dL on two
                                                                  occasions are required.
                     What treatment should be                    The child and family should be taught self-monitoring of blood
                      initiated for this patient?                 glucose, which will need to be performed multiple times daily. An
                                                                  insulin regimen should be initiated and will typically combine a

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                                  longer-acting type (such as NPH or glargine) with shorter-acting
                                                                  types (such as regular, lispro, or aspart) around meals. The physician
                                                                  will monitor both the family’s log of glucose levels and the child’s
                                                                  hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) level, which reﬂects long-term glucose
                                                                  control, and will adjust the regimen accordingly.
                     What additional screening tests              Frequent BP checks with tight control (ACE inhibitors as needed).
                      will be required for this patient?           Foot exams to test sensation and perfusion, and rule out injury.
                                                                   Annual dilated-eye exams.
                                                                   Annual microalbuminuria screening.
                                                                   Lipid proﬁle every 2–5 years.

                     The child has persistent early-             Dawn phenomenon: during sleep, increased secretion of growth
                      morning hyperglycemia. What is              hormone and other peptides, decreases the effectiveness of insulin,
                      this phenomenon?                            leading to high glucose levels early in the morning. This can be
                                                                  addressed by moving the evening dose of insulin closer to bedtime.
                     What are the chronic                         Retinopathy: develops at least 3–5 years after diagnosis; treated with
                      complications of this condition?               laser photocoagulation therapy for retinal neovascularization.
                                                                   Nephropathy: prevent with good BP control (ACE inhibitors).
                                                                   Neuropathy: prevent foot injury with careful exams and good
                                                                     footwear; late complications include autonomic dysfunction.
                                                                   Macrovascular: cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and peripheral
                                                                     vascular disease; control BP, LDL, and triglycerides; prescribe baby
                                                                     aspirin.

                    78
 CASE 6                    A 20-year-old college student presents to the emergency department after 24 hours
                            of nausea, vomiting, and severe abdominal pain. Two days prior, he attended an end-
                            of-semester party at which he drank at least six beers. He notes that he has lost about
                            9.1 kg (20 lb) in the past 3 weeks, despite being excessively hungry and thirsty. He
                            also mentions having experienced frequent urination for the past month. On physical
                            examination, he appears pale and diaphoretic, and his breath smells fruity. He has a
                            pulse of 130/min, blood pressure of 100/65 mm Hg, and respiratory rate of 20/min.
                            Relevant laboratory test results are as follows:
                            Serum Na+: 143 mg/dL
                            Serum Cl−: 101 mg/dL
                            Serum glucose: 550 mg/dL
                            Serum bicarbonate: 6 mEq/L
                            Serum pH: 7.2
                            Serum ketones: positive

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       The triad of hyperglycemia, anion gap metabolic acidosis, and
                                           ketonemia is pathognomonic for diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). The
                                           early symptoms of DKA include polyuria, polydipsia, abdominal pain,
                                           and nausea and vomiting, evolving to coma over about 24 hours.
                                           DKA must be distinguished from gastroenteritis or another abdominal
                                           process causing nausea and vomiting. In addition, alcohol poisoning or
                                           a central nervous system infection may result in loss of consciousness,

                                                                                                                       E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                           vomiting, and dehydration, similar to the events in this case.

 What is the pathogenesis of this         Diabetic ketoacidosis occurs due to relative or absolute insulin
  condition?                               deﬁciency. It can be the initial presentation of type 1 diabetes
                                           mellitus, or it may result from complications of the disease or from
                                           poor insulin management. Hyperglycemia induced by stress, excess
                                           alcohol consumption, or incorrect insulin dosing can force the body
                                           to make ketones as an emergency source of energy, since it is unable
                                           to absorb glucose for fuel in the absence of adequate insulin function.
                                           Uncontrolled, this leads to a drop in blood pH, severe dehydration,
                                           shock, and exhaustion. After > 36 hours of severe vomiting and
                                           hyperventilation, a ketoacidotic coma can develop. Remember the
                                           “5 I’s” for the precipitating factors: Infection, Ischemia, Infarction,
                                           Ignorance (poor control), Intoxication.
 What are the typical laboratory          Hyperglycemia (> 250 mg/dL), metabolic acidosis (blood pH < 7.3),
  ﬁndings in this condition?               low serum bicarbonate (< 15 mEq/L), and serum positive for ketones
                                           are diagnostic of diabetic ketoacidosis. Remember that ketone bodies
                                           are seen most often in type one diabetes.
 What is the most appropriate             Immediate therapy should consist of hospitalization to administer
  treatment for this condition?            insulin as well as ﬂuid and electrolyte correction. Subsequently, a
                                           regular insulin regimen should be instituted to reduce the patient’s
                                           chances of future episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis.

                                                                                                                  79
                     CASE 7                    A 39-year-old woman is seen in the emergency department after having fainted while
                                                exercising with her husband. She notes that, despite having maintained the same
                                                exercise regimen for the past few years and increasing her caloric intake, she has lost
                                                about 6.8 kg (15 lb) over the past 2 months. Furthermore, she sweats much more than
                                                she used to, even when not exercising. Her bowel movements have become more
                                                frequent, and her menstrual cycles are more irregular. Her blood pressure is 130/80
                                                mm Hg, pulse is 112/min, and respiratory rate is 16/min. She ﬁnds it difﬁcult to sit still
                                                during the physical examination. Her skin is moist and warm. She has mild proptosis
                                                bilaterally. The rest of her examination is unremarkable. Laboratory tests reveal the
                                                following:
                                                TSH: 0.5 μU/mL
                                                Total triiodothyronine (T3): 300 ng/dL
                                                Total thyroxine (T4): 25 μg/dL
                                                TSH-R antibodies: positive

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Graves’ disease. It is eight times more common in women than in
                                                               men and generally manifests between the ages of 20 and 40 years.
                                                               It can be distinguished from other thyroid disorders by proptosis, a
                                                               marked swelling of the periorbital tissues (Figure 3-2). Graves’ disease
                                                               must be differentiated from other causes of hypermetabolism, such as
                                                               pheochromocytoma and acromegaly, or simply acute viral illness. High
                                                               estrogen states can mimic the menstrual symptoms of hyperthyroidism

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               and must be ruled out. Drugs such as amiodarone, cloﬁbrate, and
                                                               methadone may also cause similar symptoms.

                     What is the pathogenesis of this         Graves’ disease is an autoimmune condition that results in excess
                      condition?                               synthesis and release of thyroid hormones, sometimes accompanied by
                                                               an enlarged gland. Autoantibodies form against the thyroid-stimulating
                                                               hormone receptor (TSH-R) in thyroid epithelial cell membranes,
                                                               where they bind with high afﬁnity and cause overstimulation of the
                                                               receptor, resulting in excess production of T3 and T4. Remember the
                                                               presentation of hyper-THYROIDISM:
                                                               Tremor
                                                               Heart rate up
                                                               Yawning (fatigability)
                                                               Restlessness
                                                               Oligomenorrhea and amenorrhea
                                                               Intolerance to heat
                                                               Diarrhea
                                                               Irritability
                                                               Sweating
                                                               Muscle wasting and weight loss

                     What tests and/or imaging tools          Primary hyperthyroidism is generally diagnosed via low serum TSH
                      can be used to conﬁrm the                accompanied by elevated T3 and T4. The diagnosis of Graves’ disease
                      diagnosis?                               can speciﬁcally be conﬁrmed via the presence of antibodies against the
                                                               TSH receptor.

                    80
 What is the most appropriate    Radioactive thyroid ablation, thyroidectomy, and antithyroid drugs
  treatment for this condition?   (methimazole or propylthiouracil) should all be considered in a
                                  patient with hyperthyroidism. Surgical intervention is generally more
                                  successful than medical management, particularly in patients with
                                  large goiters. Levothyroxine should be given after surgery or ablation to
                                  prevent hypothyroidism. In this patient, either ablation or antithyroid
                                  medications may be appropriate ﬁrst steps, since she does not have a
                                  palpable thyroid.

                                                                                                                E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                  FIGURE 3-2.      Severe ophthalmopathy associated with this condition.
                                  (Reproduced, with permission, from Riordan-Eva P, Whitcher JP. Vaughan &
                                  Asbury’s General Ophthalmology, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig.
                                  13.3.)

                                                                                                           81
                     CASE 8                    A 33-year-old woman presents to her family physician for a follow-up visit. Two
                                                months ago, during a visit for a viral upper respiratory infection, her blood pressure
                                                had been 140/90 mm Hg. Her physician noted this and requested that she return for
                                                further evaluation when her infection resolved. The patient is in generally good health
                                                and denies medical problems. Today, her blood pressure is 190/100 mm Hg, heart
                                                rate is 80/min, and respiratory rate is 14/min. Her physical examination is otherwise
                                                unremarkable. Relevant laboratory values are as follows:
                                                Serum glucose: 100 mg/dL (nonfasting)
                                                Serum Na+: 147 mg/dL
                                                Serum K+: 2.5 mg/dL
                                                Serum pH: 7.55
                                                Serum HCO3–: 32 mg/dL
                                                Serum osmolality: 275 mOsm/kg
                                                Urine osmolality: 530 mOsm/kg

                     What are the ECG changes                As the serum potassium concentration falls, the initial changes is T
                      associated with this condition?         wave ﬂattening, followed by development of a U wave and ST segment
                                                              depression. With more severe hypokalemia, the P-wave amplitude may
                                                              be increased, and the QRS may widen (Figure 3-3).

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?      The constellation of hypertension accompanied by hypokalemia and
                                                              metabolic alkalosis is typical of hyperaldosteronism (deﬁned as an
                                                              excess of serum aldosterone). There are two forms: primary (adrenal

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                              hypersecretion, Conn’s syndrome) and secondary (extra-adrenal
                                                              production). Conn’s syndrome affects females twice as often as males.
                     What is the pathogenesis of this        Excess aldosterone increases the sodium-potassium exchange in the
                      condition?                              distal convoluted tubules of the kidneys. As a result, sodium is retained
                                                              within the body, and potassium is excreted. High sodium levels lead
                                                              to retention of water with subsequent increases in extracellular ﬂuid
                                                              volume and blood pressure. The metabolic alkalosis arises from
                                                              increased urinary H+ excretion, mediated both by hypokalemia and
                                                              the direct stimulatory effect of aldosterone on distal renal tubular
                                                              acidiﬁcation. Potassium depletion eventually leads to muscle weakness
                                                              and fatigue because the muscle membranes are hyperpolarized
                                                              (typically when serum potassium drops below 2.5 mg/dL).

                    FIGURE 3-3.    Electrocardiographic manifestation of hypokalemia. (Reproduced, with permission, from Fuster V,
                    Alexander RW, O’Rourke RA, eds; Roberts R, King SB III, Nash IS, Prystowsky EN, assoc. eds. Hurst’s The Heart,
                    11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 13-36.)

                    82
 What tests and/or imaging tools   Elevated plasma and urine aldosterone levels and decreased serum
  could be used to conﬁrm the       renin levels conﬁrm the diagnosis of primary Conn’s syndrome.
  diagnosis?                        In contrast, both renin and aldosterone are elevated in secondary
                                    hyperaldosteronism (e.g., renovascular hypertension). A CT or MRI
                                    scan should be obtained to aid in determining whether the primary
                                    hyperaldosteronism is caused by bilateral adrenal hyperplasia or by a
                                    solitary adenoma.
 What is the most appropriate      Patients with primary hyperaldosteronism due to bilateral adrenal
  treatment for the hypokalemia,    hyperplasia are treated with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g.,
  metabolic alkalosis, and          spironolactone), which effectively treat both the hypokalemia and the
  hypertension?                     metabolic alkalosis. Antihypertensive agents are often additionally
                                    required. The most appropriate treatment for a solitary adenoma
                                    (Conn’s syndrome) is laparoscopic adrenalectomy.

                                                                                                                 E N DOC RI NOLOGY

                                                                                                            83
                     CASE 9                    A 40-year-old woman is brought to the emergency department with confusion and left
                                                lower quadrant abdominal pain. One hour earlier, her husband found her wandering
                                                around the house looking for the family dog, which had died 3 years ago. The patient
                                                is unable to describe the pain but is clearly in distress and is holding her left side. Her
                                                husband mentions that she was treated for a kidney stone at the same hospital 9 months
                                                earlier. Since then, she has lost approximately 6.8 kg (15 lb) and regularly complains of
                                                fatigue and muscle weakness. Upon examination, her blood pressure is 136/72 mm Hg,
                                                heart rate is 115/min, and respiratory rate is 16/min. There is tenderness with guarding
                                                in the left lower quadrant, as well as tenderness over her lower back. The patient is alert
                                                but is not oriented to time or place. Relevant laboratory values are as follows:
                                                Serum Na+: 152 mg/dL
                                                Serum K+: 3.2 mg/dL
                                                Serum Ca2+: 17.3 mg/dL
                                                Serum phosphate: 1.7 mg/dL
                                                Serum Cl–: 121 mg/dL

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Primary hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism must be
                                                               distinguished from a large number of other possible causes of
                                                               hypercalcemia, some of which are as simple as dehydration. Many
                                                               malignant tumors cause hypercalcemia, though not always in the
                                                               setting of bony metastases; instead, they may secrete parathyroid-
                                                               related protein (PTHrP), which mimics the effects of parathyroid

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               hormone (PTH). Hematologic cancers (e.g., multiple myeloma),
                                                               various leukemias and lymphomas, and some granulomatous
                                                               infections (via macrophage production of vitamin D) can also increase
                                                               serum calcium. Remember this mnemonic for the presentation of
                                                               hyperparathyroidism: Painful bones, renal stones, abdominal groans,
                                                               and psychiatric overtones (mental status changes).

                     What is the pathogenesis of this         Primary hyperparathyroidism is characterized by excess secretion
                      condition?                               of PTH, usually by one or multiple parathyroid glands (rarely by a
                                                               parathyroid carcinoma). PTH induces bone resorption and elevates
                                                               blood calcium. Excess serum calcium leads to increased excretion of
                                                               calcium and phosphate by the kidneys, which results in hypercalciuria
                                                               and can lead to the formation of kidney stones. Furthermore,
                                                               prolonged elevation of PTH compromises bone integrity and can lead
                                                               to fractures or cystic lesions in the skeleton. Secondary and tertiary
                                                               hyperparathyroidism are less common and originate in the kidneys.
                     What is the prognosis for patients       Successful resection of parathyroid adenomas generally leads to
                      with this condition?                     resolution of hyperparathyroidism. Bone damage also tends to repair
                                                               itself if high levels of PTH are normalized.
                     What tests and/or imaging tools          Hypercalcemia in the presence of elevated PTH is the hallmark
                      could be used to conﬁrm the              of primary hyperparathyroidism; it is typically accompanied by
                      diagnosis?                               hypophosphatemia and high urinary excretion of calcium. Serum
                                                               calcium is typically > 10.5 mg/dL, and ionized calcium is usually > 5.4
                                                               mg/dL. Levels of serum phosphate will generally be < 2.5 mg/dL. Plasma
                                                               chloride and uric acid levels may also increase; alkaline phosphatase will
                                                               be elevated if bone is markedly affected.
                     What is the most appropriate             In this patient, the treatment of choice would be surgical
                      treatment for this condition?            parathyroidectomy, since she is symptomatic. Oral administration of
                                                               large amounts of ﬂuids can be used acutely to alleviate hypercalcemia.

                    84
 CASE 10                   A 34-year-old mother of two children presents to her primary care physician for a
                            routine checkup. She has been feeling weak and tired for the past 3 months and notes
                            constipation, with bowel movements approximately three times per week. She attributes
                            the fatigue to the increase in menstrual ﬂow and painful cramps she has observed for
                            the past six cycles. For the past 2 months, she has also experienced a general lack of
                            interest in her hobbies and ﬁnds it difﬁcult to get out of bed each morning to care for
                            her children. On physical examination, she appears to be shivering slightly. She weighs
                            11.3 kg (25 lb) more than she did at her last visit 12 months ago. Her blood pressure
                            is 125/75 mm Hg, pulse is 55/min, and respirations are 12/min. A 5-cm, nontender
                            neck mass is palpable, and her skin is dry and cold. Delayed relaxation of deep tendon
                            reﬂexes is also noted. Her physician orders blood tests that reveal the following:
                            Hemoglobin: 9.7 g/dL
                            TSH: 14 μU/mL
                            Total triiodothyronine (T3): 60 ng/dL
                            Total thyroxine (T4): 3.2 μg/dL
                            Thyroid peroxidase antibodies: positive

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (also known as chronic autoimmune
                                          thyroiditis). The diagnosis of Hashimoto’s must be differentiated from
                                          other conditions that can cause similar symptoms, such as primary
                                          amyloidosis, pernicious anemia, depression, acute psychiatric illness,
                                          menstrual disorders, or hyperlipidemias. Drugs such as androgens,

                                                                                                                        E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                          glucocorticoids, phenobarbital, phenytoin, salicylates, and sertraline
                                          can also affect thyroid hormone metabolism and clearance.

 What is the pathogenesis of this        Primary hypothyroidism typically results from thyroid disease, as
  condition?                              opposed to insufﬁcient thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) from the
                                          anterior pituitary. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is the most common cause of
                                          hypothyroidism in the United States and other iodine-sufﬁcient areas.
                                          The mechanism of the disease is thought to be mediated by T cells,
                                          which recognize thyroid antigens and launch a cytotoxic attack. The
                                          high serum concentrations of antithyroid antibodies present in most
                                          patients with Hashimoto’s are thought to play little, if any, role in the
                                          pathogenesis. The incidence of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is 10–20 times
                                          higher in women than in men.
 What tests could be used to             Primary hypothyroidism can be either subclinical or overt. Subclinical
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                   hypothyroidism manifests as a high TSH level with normal T3 and T4
                                          levels. Overt hypothyroidism manifests as a high TSH accompanied by
                                          low T3 and T4, usually with clinical symptoms of hypothyroidism. In
                                          clinically hypothyroid patients, routine testing for antithyroid antibodies
                                          is not required because nearly all will have chronic autoimmune
                                          thyroiditis. However, the presence of antibodies against thyroid
                                          peroxidase is predictive of a more severe, protracted course.
 What is the most appropriate            Treatment with levothyroxine and regular monitoring of TSH and
  treatment for this condition?           T3/T4 levels is suggested for this patient. Regular monitoring is
                                          recommended to avoid precipitating hyperthyroidism via excess
                                          levothyroxine or myxedema through insufﬁcient medication.

                                                                                                                  85
                     CASE 11                   A 29-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with left-sided pain that
                                                has waxed and waned in severity over several hours. The pain started in her left ﬂank
                                                but is now most intense in her left labial region. Her gynecologic history is notable
                                                for 12 months of amenorrhea. She is not pregnant but does report irregular milky
                                                discharge from both breasts for many months. Last week, she was diagnosed with peptic
                                                ulcer disease and given a prescription for omeprazole, which she has been taking as
                                                directed. Upon examination, the patient is clearly in distress. She cannot lie ﬂat on the
                                                examination table and initially refuses to let the physician palpate her abdomen. Her
                                                blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate is 120/min, and respiratory rate is 19/min.
                                                Her examination is notable only for some left lower quadrant tenderness. Bowel sounds
                                                are normal. Relevant laboratory results include a serum glucose level of 100 mg/dL
                                                (nonfasting), a serum Ca2+ level of 12.3 mg/dL, and a serum gastrin level of 253 pg/mL
                                                (nonfasting).

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). The multiple endocrine
                                                               neoplasia syndromes are inherited as autosomal dominant traits and
                                                               affect a speciﬁc combination of endocrine glands. MEN1 (also called
                                                               Wermer’s syndrome) is quite rare, affecting approximately 2–10 of every
                                                               100,000 individuals, and affects men and women equally. It targets the
                                                               parathyroid glands, pancreas, and pituitary (3 P’s). In rare cases, the
                                                               adrenal cortex is also involved, and some patients even develop carcinoid
                                                               tumors in the thorax or abdomen. The differential diagnosis for MEN1
                                                               includes sporadic or familial tumors of the parathyroids, pancreas, or

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               pituitary. Hypercalcemia can lead to increased gastrin levels, mimicking
                                                               a gastrinoma. Similarly, routine consumption of H2-blockers or proton
                                                               pump inhibitors can also increase gastrin secretion. A useful mnemonic
                                                               for MEN1 is “Please Please Pay Attention to peptic ulceration, you
                                                               worms”: Adenomas of:
                                                                Pituitary
                                                                Pancreatic islets
                                                                Parathyroid
                                                                Adrenal cortex
                                                                Associated with peptic ulceration
                                                                Syndrome is called “Wermer’s syndrome”

                     What is the pathogenesis of this         Hyperparathyroidism: MEN1 usually affects the parathyroid
                      condition?                               glands ﬁrst. Excess secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) leads
                                                               to hypercalcemia. If untreated, this can lead to kidney stones or
                                                               irreversible tubular injury. Some patients remain hyperparathyroid
                                                               and asymptomatic for many years, while others manifest the
                                                               symptoms by age 20. However, nearly all MEN1 patients develop
                                                               hyperparathyroidism by age 50.
                                                                Enteropancreatic endocrine adenomas:
                                                                   One-third of MEN1 patients will develop gastrinomas (Zollinger-
                                                                    Ellison syndrome); resulting high levels of gastrin stimulate
                                                                    excess acid production and lead to formation of severe gastric and
                                                                    duodenal ulcers. These patients are at much greater risk of gastric
                                                                    or intestinal rupture.
                                                                   Approximately 15% of MEN1 patients develop insulinomas, which
                                                                    cause fasting hypoglycemia. Other hormone-secreting tumors,
                                                                    such as glucagonomas and somatostatinomas, rarely develop but
                                                                    are associated with serious complications. Eventually, about 50%
                                                                    of MEN1 patients will develop pancreatic tumors.

                    86
                                        Pituitary adenomas: Nearly 25% of MEN1 patients develop
                                         prolactinomas, which cause the galactorrhea and amenorrhea in
                                         women and decreased libido in men. Other patients may develop
                                         ACTH-secreting tumors and consequent Cushing’s syndrome/
                                         disease.
 What tests could be used to          Blood work can be used to assess the various abnormalities that may
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                be seen in MEN1, such as serum calcium and glucose abnormalities.
                                       Patients will typically have varying degrees of hypercalcemia
                                       (parathyroid involvement) and fasting hypoglycemia (insulinomas).
                                       Growth hormone and prolactin levels may be elevated (pituitary
                                       tumors). Gastrinomas can be detected by measuring serum gastrin
                                       levels following secretin challenge. Genetic testing for the menin gene
                                       is now possible and is a valuable tool for family members of a proband.
 What is the most appropriate          Hyperparathyroidism: Surgical treatment of the hyperparathyroidism
  treatment for this condition?          experienced by MEN1 patients is often warranted. Typically, three
                                         of the four parathyroids are removed; only a portion of the smallest
                                         one is left in the neck, and its function must be monitored carefully.
                                         Patients with complete parathyroidectomy must receive daily
                                         calcium and vitamin D supplements.
                                        Enteropancreatic endocrine adenomas:
                                          Patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome are treated with proton
                                           pump inhibitors, which control the amount of acid secreted by the
                                           stomach. In severe cases, surgical removal of the entire stomach

                                                                                                                   E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                           may be necessary.
                                          The development of malignant pancreatic tumors is gradual and
                                           difﬁcult to monitor. It is not clear that aggressive surgery improves
                                           survival of MEN1 patients.
                                        Pituitary adenomas: Small prolactinomas don't require treatment
                                         unless they cause menstrual irregularities. Dopamine agonists can
                                         be used to shrink larger tumors. However, in some refractory cases,
                                         surgery and radiotherapy may be warranted.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Because MEN1 has such a complex constellation of abnormalities,
  with this condition?                 the prognosis for these patients depends upon the success of individual
                                       treatments and the chances of recurrence. Careful monitoring is
                                       required to reduce the latter.

                                                                                                             87
                     CASE 12                   A 49-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for a work-related physical
                                                examination. He is in generally good health, though he admits to being in worse
                                                physical shape than he was 5 years ago. He attributes this to a career change that has
                                                him working at a desk instead of on his feet all day. He has tried repeatedly to start a
                                                new exercise regimen over the past year but generally only manages to exercise three
                                                times each month. He eats three meals a day but admits to a love of junk food. He
                                                drinks alcohol daily, typically one or two beers with dinner. He smoked one pack
                                                of cigarettes a day for 20 years before quitting last year. His blood pressure is 160/95
                                                mm Hg, pulse is 90/min, and respiratory rate is 16/min. He is 168 cm (5′6′′) tall and
                                                weighs 90.7 kg (200 lb). His last full checkup was nearly 3 years earlier, so his physician
                                                recommends a full panel of blood work. Relevant results are as follows:
                                                Serum glucose: 145 mg/dL (fasting)
                                                Serum total cholesterol: 208 mg/dL
                                                Serum triglycerides: 410 mg/dL
                                                Serum HDL: 26 mg/dL
                                                Serum LDL: 173 mg/dL
                                                Serum pH: 7.42

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Metabolic syndrome. The mechanism underlying metabolic syndrome
                                                               is one of insulin resistance in combination with abdominal obesity.
                                                               The constellation of abnormalities also includes dyslipidemias (which
                                                               promote plaque formation in the arterial vasculature), hypertension,

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               and a hypercoagulable state.

                     What are the typical laboratory          Patients with metabolic syndrome generally have hypertriglyceridemia
                      ﬁndings in this condition?               (> 150 mg/dL), fasting hyperglycemia (> 100 mg/dL), and reduced
                                                               high-density lipoprotein levels (< 40 mg/dL in males and < 50 mg/dL in
                                                               females). Furthermore, they typically have larger waist circumferences
                                                               and higher blood pressures than healthy individuals of the same age.
                     What drugs are contraindicated           Medications should be chosen with care to avoid worsening any of
                      in this condition?                       the conditions associated with metabolic syndrome. For example,
                                                               β-blockers should be avoided for blood pressure control since they
                                                               could worsen hyperglycemia.
                     What is the most appropriate             Initial management should focus on reducing risk factors for major
                      treatment for this condition?            cardiovascular disease; in this patient, smoking cessation certainly
                                                               helped. Control of glucose and LDL levels and blood pressure would
                                                               be necessary. Additionally, lifestyle modiﬁcations would improve the
                                                               patient’s long-term prognosis. Diet and exercise should be tailored with
                                                               the goal of bringing the patient’s body mass index (BMI) under 25 kg/m2
                                                               (currently 32.3 kg/m2). The patient should sharply reduce his intake of
                                                               saturated fats and cholesterol.
                     What are some of the                     If left unchecked, metabolic syndrome can progress to full-blown
                      complications associated with this       type 2 diabetes. In addition, patients have a markedly increased risk of
                      condition?                               myocardial infarction and stroke as a result of their hypercoagulability
                                                               and dyslipidemias.

                    88
 CASE 13                    A 29-year-old woman presents with a 1- week history of a neck mass. She noticed
                             the mass while showering one day and is very concerned because her mother and
                             grandfather both died of thyroid cancer at an early age. She denies any history of
                             neck radiation or heat or cold intolerance. On examination, her temperature is
                             37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse is 85/min, and blood pressure is 136/90 mm Hg. She has
                             a ﬁrm, nontender 3-cm neck nodule located anteriorly just to the left of midline,
                             immediately beneath the thyroid cartilage. The nodule rises when the patient
                             swallows. There is palpable cervical adenopathy bilaterally. Relevant laboratory
                             ﬁndings are as follows:
                             Serum Na+: 140 mg/dL            Serum Ca2+: 10.5 mg/dL
                             Serum K+: 3.9 mg/dL             Serum phosphate: 1.1 mg/dL
                             Serum glucose: 90 mg/dL         Serum parathyroid hormone: 70 pg/mL

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a (MEN2a). This patient has
                                           a thyroid mass concerning for malignancy (based on the presence
                                           of lymphadenopathy), a family history of thyroid cancer, and serum
                                           laboratory values (calcium, phosphate, and parathyroid hormone
                                           [PTH]) consistent with primary hyperparathyroidoism. The differential
                                           diagnosis of a thyroid mass concerning for malignancy in a patient with
                                           a strong family history of thyroid cancer includes familial medullary
                                           thyroid cancer (FMTC) and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b
                                           (MEN2b). However, neither FMTC nor MEN2b patients have

                                                                                                                       E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                           hyperparathyroidism. MEN2a is an autosomal dominant disorder
                                           characterized by (1) medullary thyroid cancer (MTC),
                                           (2) pheochromocytoma (PCC), and (3) primary parathyroid
                                           hyperplasia (PPH). Nearly all MEN2a patients develop MTC, often
                                           early in life, while a smaller percentage develop PCC or PPH.
                                           MEN2b, also an autosomal dominant disorder, is characterized
                                           by (1) MTC, (2) PCC, and (3) mucosal neuromas/intestinal
                                           ganglioneuromas, (4) developmental abnormalities, and
                                           (5) characteristic body type (including decreased upper/lower body
                                           ratio and Marfanoid body habitus). MTC occurs in almost all patients
                                           and usually develops at an earlier age and is more aggressive than in
                                           MEN2a. Both syndromes affect men and women equally.

 What is the etiology of this             The underlying defect in the MEN2 syndromes is a germline defect in
  condition?                               the RET proto-oncogene.
 What should be included in               The treatment for MTC includes thyroidectomy. However, due to
  the preoperative evaluation for          the high incidence of PCC in patients with MEN2a/2b, all MTC
  patients with this condition?            patients (whether they have conﬁrmed MEN2a/2b or not) should be
                                           evaluated for PCC, and coexisting PCC should be removed before
                                           thyroidectomy. Undiagnosed PCC can cause signiﬁcant morbidity
                                           (or even death) during thyroid surgery.
 What are the typical laboratory          A characteristic feature of MTC is the production of calcitonin. Basal
  ﬁndings in this condition?               serum calcitonin concentrations usually correlate with tumor mass
                                           and are almost always high in patients with a palpable tumor. Primary
                                           hyperparathyroidism is characterized by elevated PTH levels in the
                                           face of elevated calcium and decreased phosphate levels. Patients
                                           with PCC have elevated levels of both 24-hour urinary fractionated
                                           metanephrine and plasma fractionated metanephrine. Additionally,
                                           genetic testing for RET gene mutations in the proband and his or
                                           her “at risk” family members is essential to prevent the morbidity and
                                           mortality associated with MTC.

                                                                                                                  89
                     CASE 14                   A 65-year-old woman presents with a history of low back pain. She began menopause
                                                at age 48 and did not receive hormone replacement therapy. Her mother had a hip
                                                fracture at age 71. She spends several hours each day outside gardening and consumes
                                                1500 mg of calcium and 800 IU of Vitamin D each day. She denies any history of loose
                                                stools, weight loss, fever, chills, night sweats, or neurological problems. On examination,
                                                she is 1.5-m (4′11″) tall and weighs 45 kg (100 lb). Lumbar-spine ﬁlms reveal a new
                                                vertebral fracture at the L4 level and diffusely decreased radiodensity and loss of
                                                trabecular structure in her bones. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry of the hip reveals a
                                                bone mineral density T score of –1.5. Relevant laboratory results are as follows:
                                                Serum Ca2+: 9.1 mg/dL
                                                Serum phosphate: 3.5 mg/dL
                                                Serum alkaline phosphatase: 110 U/L
                                                Serum calcidiol: 21 ng/mL

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Postmenopausual osteoporosis, which is a common disease with a
                                                               spectrum of manifestations ranging from asymptomatic bone loss to
                                                               disabling hip fracture. A history of pathologic fractures (fractures that
                                                               are caused by minor or trivial trauma) in a postmenopausual woman
                                                               is strongly suggestive of a diagnosis of osteoporosis, regardless of bone
                                                               mineral density ﬁndings. Alternatively, osteoporosis is also deﬁned as a
                                                               T score less than –2.5 in a patient with no fractures or risk factors
                                                               (a “T score” is the number of standard deviations that the bone-mineral

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               density measurement is above or below the mean bone density of
                                                               normal young adults). Osteopenia is deﬁned as a T score between
                                                               –1 and –2.5 in patients with no pathologic fractures. In patients with
                                                               osteoporosis, acute or chronic back pain is common and most often
                                                               due to vertebral fractures. The following secondary causes of pathologic
                                                               fracture should always be ruled out:
                                                                Primary hyperparathyroidism: not consistent with patient’s normal
                                                                  calcium, phosphate, and alkaline phosphatase values (see Table 3-1).
                                                                Vitamin D deﬁciency (osteomalacia) due to inadequate intake,
                                                                  lack of exposure to sunlight, or malabsorption: ruled out by the
                                                                  normal calcidiol level and the history of adequate supplementation
                                                                  (800 IU/day), ample sunlight exposure, and the absence of
                                                                  malabsorptive symptoms.
                                                                Multiple myeloma (MM): the patient has no constitutional
                                                                  symptoms suggestive of malignancy; however, complete blood count
                                                                  with differential examination and a routine urinalysis are warranted
                                                                  to screen for ﬁndings such as elevated urine protein or anemia, that
                                                                  might suggest MM.

                     What is the pathogenesis of this         Osteoporosis is a progressive metabolic bone disease characterized by
                      condition?                               decreased bone density (bone mass per unit volume) with fragility and
                                                               microarchitectural disruption of bone structure. In premenopausal
                                                               women, estrogen helps to slow bone resorption. In postmenopausal
                                                               women, relative estrogen deﬁciency removes one natural barrier to
                                                               bone resorption. Skeletal weakness leads to fractures from minor
                                                               trauma, particularly in the thoracic and lumbar spine, wrist, and hip.
                                                               In contrast to osteomalacia, the bone in osteoporosis is mineralized
                                                               normally. Additionally, calcium, phosphate, and alkaline phosphatase
                                                               levels are all normal (see Table 3-1).

                    90
 What risk factors are associated                   Risk factors include: increased age, low body weight, maternal history
  with an increased incidence of                     of osteoporosis, excessive alcohol use, smoking, and (most important)
  this condition?                                    history of a previous fracture.
 What is the most appropriate                        Nonpharmacologic
  treatment for this condition?                         Calcium and vitamin D: all patients with established osteoporosis
                                                         should receive calcium and vitamin D supplementation to
                                                         enhance mineralization of newly formed bone. Recommended
                                                         daily doses are 1200 to 1500 mg of calcium and 600 to 800 IU of
                                                         vitamin D.
                                                        Physical activity: muscle strengthening, balance training, and
                                                         assessment of physical hazards in the home all protect against falls.
                                                        Lifestyle modiﬁcation: stopping smoking and excessive alcohol use
                                                         slows disease progression.
                                                      Pharmacologic
                                                        Antiresorptive agents (inhibit osteoclast activity).
                                                          Postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy: no longer
                                                            widely used due to concerns about the long-term use of estrogen
                                                            (including risk of breast cancer and cardiovascular disease).
                                                          Selective estrogen-receptor modulators (raloxifene): decrease risk
                                                            of vertebral (but not nonvertebral) fractures while decreasing the
                                                            risk of breast cancer.
                                                          Bisphosphonates (alendronate, risedronate): reduce incidence of
                                                            hip, vertebral, and nonvertebral fractures; may cause esophagitis,
                                                            so are not recommended for patients with upper gastrointestinal

                                                                                                                                     E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                            disease (e.g., gastroesophageal reﬂux disease).
                                                          Calcitonin: may decrease risk of vertebral (but not nonvertebral)
                                                            fractures.
                                                        Anabolic agents (act on osteoblasts to stimulate bone formation).
                                                          Parathyroid hormone: decreases risk of both vertebral and
                                                            nonvertebral fractures.

TA B L E 3 - 1 .   Calcium, Phosphate, and Alkaline Phosphatase Levels in Disorders Commonly Affecting Bone

                                               CA2+                           PHOSPHATE                  ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE

   Osteoporosis                                  N                                N                                 N

   Hyperparathyroidism                           ↑                                ↓                                 ↑

   Paget’s disease of bone               N (sometimes ↑)                          N                               ↑↑↑

   Osteomalacia                                  ↓                                ↓                                ↑*

N = normal.
*In patients with an elevated alkaline phosphatase, a normal serum calcidiol level effectively rules out osteomalacia as the
underlying cause of bone disease.

                                                                                                                                91
                     CASE 15                       A 53-year-old man is brought to the emergency department after tripping over his cat in
                                                    his living room. He is hard of hearing and shouts that he did not see the cat because he
                                                    was forcing his baseball cap onto his head. He cannot put weight on his right leg and
                                                    feels severe pain in his right thigh. The patient also notes that he has been experiencing
                                                    pain in both legs for the past few months. The pain is throbbing and persists for a few
                                                    hours, and then subsides. A heating pad helps to soothe the ache, but the patient has
                                                    not used any medication for the pain. He is otherwise in good health and denies any
                                                    history of hepatobiliary disease. Upon examination, his left leg and hip appear to have
                                                    full range of motion. His right leg is limited on both abduction and adduction; medial
                                                    rotation causes severe pain. X-ray of the hip reveals multiple spiral fractures of the right
                                                    femoral diaphysis. Relevant laboratory values include the following:
                                                    Serum Ca2+: 9.0 mg/dL
                                                    Serum phosphate: 3.0 mg/dL
                                                    Serum alkaline phosphatase: 500 U/L
                                                    Serum calcidiol: 20 ng/mL

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?           Paget’s disease of bone. Also known as osteitis deformans, the disease
                                                                   affects approximately 3% of individuals over the age of 40 years.
                                                                   Men are affected more often than women, and individuals in the
                                                                   northeastern United States are more frequently affected than are
                                                                   those in other areas of the country. However, many are not diagnosed
                                                                   because of the gradual onset of the disease; often, only one or two

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                                   bones may be affected. Primarily, the spine, pelvis, skull, femur, and
                                                                   tibia are susceptible, although the disease can affect any bone in the
                                                                   body. Pain is generally the ﬁrst symptom; bone weakness and fractures
                                                                   develop later. If the skull is involved, a patient’s hat size may increase,
                                                                   and nerve compression can lead to deafness. If serum calcium is also
                                                                   elevated, hyperparathyroidism should be ruled out.

                     What is the pathogenesis of this             Paget’s is a disease of bony remodeling in which increased bone
                      condition?                                   resorption is followed by highly disorganized new bone formation.
                                                                   The new bone is soft and porous, which leads to bending, brittleness,
                                                                   arthritis, and stress fractures. The bone becomes increasingly vascular
                                                                   and palpably warm. Remember the symptoms and sequelae of
                                                                   Paget’s disease with the mnemonic PANICS: Pain, Arthralgia, Nerve
                                                                   compression/Neural deafness, Increased bone density, Cardiac failure,
                                                                   and Skull/Sclerotic vertebrae/Sarcomas (osteosarcomas).
                     What tests and/or imaging tools              See Table 3-1. X-rays can be used to observe changes in bone due
                      could be used to conﬁrm the                  to Paget’s disease (Figure 3-4), especially bowing. Additionally, a
                      diagnosis?                                   radioisotope bone scan can be used to highlight regions of increased
                                                                   bone resorption (Figure 3-5) before symptoms become apparent on
                                                                   plain ﬁlms.
                     What is the most appropriate                 Acute management of this patient involves stabilization and monitoring
                      treatment for this patient?                  of the fracture. However, longer-term treatment must focus on
                                                                   suppression of Paget’s disease. Medical management revolves around
                                                                   reducing bone breakdown and stabilizing newly formed bone.
                                                                   Bisphosphonates, generally used to treat osteoporosis, can also be
                                                                   useful in Paget’s. Patients are encouraged to increase dietary calcium
                                                                   intake. In addition, exercise can keep joints ﬂexible and reduce pain
                                                                   by strengthening muscles that stabilize joints; however, exercises must
                                                                   be chosen carefully to minimize fracture risk. NSAIDs are effective for
                                                                   pain management.

                    92
             A                             B
FIGURE 3-4.       Early and late radiographs of Paget’s disease of the tibia,
taken when the patient was 45 years old (A) and 65 years old (B). (Reprinted,
with permission, from Skinner HB. Current Diagnosis & Treatment in Orthope-
dics, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003: Fig. 6-89.)

                                                                                 E N DOC RI NOLOGY

FIGURE 3-5.       Bone scan of patient with Paget’s disease of the skull,
spine, pelvis, right femur, and acetabulum. (Reproduced, with permission,
from Greenspan FS, Gardner DG. Basic and Clinical Endocrinology, 7th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 8-33.)

                                                                            93
                     CASE 16                    A 32-year-old man presents to his primary care physician after experiencing a severe
                                                 headache for 1 week. He rates the pain as 8 out of 10 and says that it is nearly constant.
                                                 He has taken 650 mg acetaminophen every 6 hours for the past 5 days but has not
                                                 gained signiﬁcant relief. He has been in generally good health for most of his life, but
                                                 has lost 2.7 kg (6 lb) in the past month. He has also begun feeling extremely anxious
                                                 and “shaky,” which he attributes to job-related stress. However, he admits that the
                                                 level of anxiety exceeds the gravity of his problems at work. He has stopped exercising
                                                 because of abdominal pain that makes it difﬁcult to lift weights; he cannot localize
                                                 the pain, noting that his entire abdomen aches at times. He also notes that he sweats
                                                 much more than he used to and cannot drink enough water to compensate. Upon
                                                 examination, he is trembling as he sits on the examination table. His blood pressure
                                                 is 220/160 mm Hg, heart rate 148/min, and respiratory rate 17/min. His abdomen is
                                                 soft and nontender; bowel sounds are normal. On two occasions during the visit, he
                                                 experiences severe nausea but does not vomit.

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?        Pheochromocytoma (PCC). A tumor of the adrenal medulla which
                                                                overproduces epinephrine, norepinephrine, or dopamine, leading to
                                                                hypertension, tachycardia, palpitations, and tremors. Use the “10%
                                                                rule” with these tumors: 10% are malignant, 10% are bilateral, 10% are
                                                                extra-adrenal, 10% are pediatric, 10% are familial, 10% are recurring,
                                                                10% are associated with multiple endocrine neoplasias, and 10%
                                                                present with a stroke. PCC may sometimes be confused clinically with
                                                                thyrotoxicosis, as many of the symptoms are similar. In addition, use

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                                of substances such as amphetamines and cocaine can cause similar
                                                                symptoms, as can clonidine withdrawal. PCC can cause ECG changes
                                                                and chest pain suggestive of acute cardiac events; these must be ruled
                                                                out.

                     What is the pathogenesis of this          PCC’s cause sympathetic overload as a result of excess production
                      condition?                                of catecholamines by neoplastic chromafﬁn cells. The resulting
                                                                vasoconstriction causes a dramatic increase in blood pressure. Patients
                                                                experience other symptoms such as headaches, sweating, tachycardia,
                                                                palpitations, anxiety, tremors, and hypermetabolism. In 10% of cases,
                                                                PCCs are a component of multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes
                                                                types 2a and 2b. Consider PCC in young patients with paroxysmal
                                                                hypertension and/or the classic TSH triad of PCC: Tachycardia,
                                                                Sweating, Headache. Use the abbreviation TSH to associate
                                                                pheochromocytomas with the thyroid gland (i.e., PCCs warrant a
                                                                workup for MEN syndromes 2a and 2b, both of which are associated
                                                                with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid).
                     What are the typical laboratory           Patients with PCC have elevated levels of both 24-hour urinary
                      ﬁndings in this condition?                fractionated metanephrines and plasma fractionated metanephrine.
                     What imaging tools could be used          A CT scan of the abdomen (Figure 3-6) can be used to conﬁrm the
                      to conﬁrm the diagnosis?                  diagnosis if a pheochromocytoma is suspected. MR imaging can also
                                                                be helpful; both modalities have a sensitivity > 98%. Nuclear medicine
                                                                scans, such as SPECT imaging with [123I]m-iodobenzylguanidine ([123I]
                                                                mIBG) and PET imaging with 18F-labeled deoxyglucose (18FDG), can
                                                                also be used to detect tumors that are not visible with other modalities.

                    94
 What is the most appropriate    The treatment of choice is laparoscopic excision of the tumor; an
  treatment for this condition?   open laparotomy is necessary for large tumors that cannot effectively
                                  be removed via laparoscopy. However, the patient’s blood pressure
                                  must be reduced and maintained pharmacologically for approximately
                                  1 week (or until electrocardiographic changes are corrected) before
                                  surgery is attempted.

                                                                                                                E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                  FIGURE 3-6.       Left infrarenal paraganglioma, CT scan. (Reproduced, with
                                  permission, from Greenspan FS, Gardner DG. Basic and Clinical Endocrinol-
                                  ogy, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 11-9.)

                                                                                                           95
                     CASE 17                         A 62-year-old man is brought into the emergency department after experiencing a
                                                      generalized tonic-clonic seizure. He was recently diagnosed with small cell carcinoma
                                                      of the lung but is taking no medications and has not received chemotherapy. Physical
                                                      examination reveals a patient in the postictal state. His blood pressure is 138/86
                                                      mm Hg, and heart rate is 76/min without orthostatic changes. He has no lower
                                                      extremity edema. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                      Serum:
                                                        Na+: 105 mEq/L      BUN: 5 mg/dL
                                                        K+: 4.0 mEq/L       Creatinine: 1.0 mg/dL
                                                        Cl–: 70 mEq/L       Glucose: 85 mg/dL
                                                        HCO3–: 25 mmol/L
                                                      Urinalysis:
                                                        Na+: 91 mEq/L
                                                        K+: 64 mEq/L
                                                        Urea nitrogen: 140 mg/L

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?            The patient has a history of lung cancer, a common cause of the
                                                                    syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH).
                                                                    A normal blood pressure and the lack of orthostatic changes indicate
                                                                    euvolemia.

                     What is the differential diagnosis            Considerations include reset osmostat, excessive water intake (primary
                      for euvolemic hyponatremia?                   or psychogenic polydipsia), and impaired urine-diluting ability due

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                                    to increased circulating vasopressin levels and/or vasopressin effect
                                                                    (SIADH, secondary adrenal insufﬁciency, hypothyroidism, congestive
                                                                    heart failure, cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome). Patients with thiazide-
                                                                    induced hyponatremia may also be clinically euvolemic.
                     What are the diagnostic criteria              The diagnostic criteria for SIADH are (1) hyponatremia with
                      for this condition?                           accompanying low serum osmolality; (2) elevated urine osmolality; and
                                                                    (3) absence of conditions such as congestive heart failure, cirrhosis,
                                                                    renal insufﬁciency, and adrenal/thyroid insufﬁciency. Remember
                                                                    SIADH: Spasms, Isn’t any pitting edema (key to differential diagnosis),
                                                                    Anorexia, Disorientation (and other psychoses), and Hyponatremia.
                     Why are the other conditions in               The other disorders in the differential are unlikely for the following
                      the differential less likely?                 reasons:
                                                                     Reset osmostat: serum sodium is rarely below 125 mEq/L, and
                                                                      neurologic symptoms are unusual.
                                                                     Psychogenic polydipsia: look for maximally dilute urine (Uosm < 100
                                                                      mOsm/kg). The urine osmolality for this patient is Uosm = 2(UNa +
                                                                      UK) + Uurea nitrogen/2.8 = 2(91 + 64) + 140/2.8 = 360 mOsm/kg.
                                                                    There is no history of thiazide diuretic use or of another disorder that
                                                                    would cause increased circulating ADH levels.
                     What is the therapeutic goal for a            The goal is to raise body ﬂuid tonicity to treat the neurologic
                      patient with severe hyponatremia?             manifestations of cerebral edema. Rapid correction of serum sodium,
                                                                    however, carries a risk of central pontine myelinolysis.

                    96
 What is the most appropriate   Aggressive intervention for hyponatremia may be achieved with a
  treatment for hyponatremia?    hypertonic (3%) saline solution. The serum sodium may be raised by
                                 5 mEq/L over the ﬁrst 2–3 hours, then at no more than 0.5 mEq/L/
                                 hour, to a level of no more than 130 mEq/L. The total amount of
                                 sodium required is calculated as follows: 5 mEq/L × total body water
                                 (TBW) = 5 × (0.6 × 60 L) = 180 mEq. TBW, rather than extracellular
                                 ﬂuid volume, is used because a hypertonic solution redistributes water
                                 from the intracellular to the extracellular compartment, so the effective
                                 volume of distribution is the TBW. TBW is estimated in liters as two-
                                 thirds of a patient’s weight in kilograms.

                                                                                                             E N DOC RI NOLOGY

                                                                                                       97
                     CASE 18                   A 44-year-old woman presents to her primary physician for her annual checkup. She is
                                                healthy and denies any medical problems. She has a blood pressure of 110/75 mm Hg,
                                                pulse 72/min, and respiratory rate 14/min. Her physical examination is remarkable only
                                                for a discrete, ﬁrm, nontender mass, approximately 0.9 cm in diameter, palpable just
                                                lateral to the midline of the neck which rises when the patient swallows.

                     What aspects of the patient’s           The greatest concern in a patient with a thyroid nodule is the risk
                      history should be inquired about?       of malignancy; the patient’s risk factors for thyroid cancer should be
                                                              determined. A history should be taken of the following:
                                                               Symptoms of hyper- or hypothyroidism.
                                                               Compressive symptoms (dyspnea, coughing, choking, dysphagia,
                                                                hoarseness).
                                                               A prior history of head or neck radiation.
                                                               Any family history of thyroid cancer or endocrine abnormalities.

                                                              Less than 1% of patients with a hyperfunctioning nodule have
                                                              carcinoma, whereas 10–20% of patients with hypofunctioning nodule
                                                              do. Compressive symptoms or a history of ionizing radiation to the neck
                                                              are very concerning for malignancy and are considered indications
                                                              for surgery. A family history of thyroid cancer, hyperparathyroidism,
                                                              or pheochromocytoma warrants a full-workup for multiple endocrine
                                                              neoplasia (MEN), including testing for mutations in the RET
                                                              oncogene and measuring serum calcitonin levels (see Case 13).

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                              Additionally, the presence of regional lymphadenopathy on physical
                                                              exam (not noted in the current patient) raises the index of suspicion for
                                                              malignancy.

                     What is the most appropriate next       After a thorough history and physical exam, it is appropriate to obtain a
                      step in management?                     TSH level in a patient with a thyroid nodule.
                                                               If the patient has a low TSH, with or without signs or symptoms of
                                                                thyrotoxicosis (e.g., weight loss, heat sensitivity, exopthalmos, etc.),
                                                                it is appropriate to perform an I-123 scintiscan (radioisotope scan)
                                                                to conﬁrm the presence of a “hot” (i.e., functional, probably non-
                                                                malignant) nodule. Depending on the severity of thyrotoxicosis,
                                                                treatment ranges from observation to pharmacological management
                                                                with propylthiouracil or methimazole.
                                                               If the patient has a normal or high TSH, a ﬁne needle aspiration
                                                                (FNA) of the nodule should be performed. FNA poses little risk to
                                                                the patient and can ﬁrmly establish a diagnosis in approximately
                                                                two-thirds of cases. Indeterminate results warrant repeat FNA.
                                                                If a repeat FNA does not provide a diagnosis, I-123 scintigraphy
                                                                should be performed. “Cold” nodules on scintigraphy are then
                                                                treated surgically whereas “hot” nodules are observed or treated
                                                                pharmacologically depending on the clinical picture.

                    98
 What is the most appropriate    If the nodule is suspicious for malignancy, total thyroidectomy is
  treatment for this condition?   the treatment of choice (suspicious nodules are so classiﬁed by the
                                  presence of any of the following: a history of head/neck radiation;
                                  compressive symptoms; an FNA showing malignant cells; or an
                                  indeterminate FNA with follow-up radioisotope testing showing a
                                  “cold” nodule). Medullary carcinoma and anaplastic carcinoma
                                  typically require more aggressive surgical resection and adjuvant
                                  treatment. Since this patient is < 45 years of age and her tumor is
                                  < 1 cm in diameter, she may only require partial thyroidectomy,
                                  depending on histologic subtype, particularly if she has no cervical
                                  lymph node involvement. T4 is prescribed postoperatively for about
                                  2 months to suppress TSH during the initial weeks of follow-up. It
                                  is discontinued approximately 6 weeks before a whole-body 131I scan
                                  is used to evaluate residual thyroid tissue. The patient must also be
                                  monitored long-term for early diagnosis of recurrence or metastasis.

                                                                                                               E N DOC RI NOLOGY

                                                                                                          99
                     CASE 19                    A 33-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with neck pain. The pain
                                                 began 2 weeks ago, is constant and sharp, and radiates to her jaw and ears. Over the past
                                                 few weeks, she has also been having occasional loose stools and experiencing fatigue,
                                                 malaise, and myalgias. She has no history of medical problems but does report having a
                                                 “cold” 4 weeks ago. On examination, her temperature is 37.9°C (100.2°F), pulse
                                                 96/min, and blood pressure 134/82 mm Hg. There is diffuse enlargement of the thyroid
                                                 gland, which is exquisitely tender to even mild palpation. Relevant laboratory results
                                                 include:
                                                 TSH: 1.0 μU/mL
                                                 Total triiodothyronine (T3): 300 ng/dL
                                                 Total thyroxine (T4): 20 μg/dL

                     What is the most likely diagnosis?       Subacute granulomatous thyroiditis (SGT; also called de Quervain’s
                                                               thyroiditis), which is characterized by the combination of (1) neck pain
                                                               (often radiating to the jaw), (2) exquisite thyroid tenderness, and (3) diffuse
                                                               goiter. The patient’s clinical and biochemical hyperthyroidism (loose
                                                               stools, decreased TSH, elevated triiodothyronine [T3] and thyroxine [T4])
                                                               are consistent with early-stage SGT.

                     What is the pathogenesis of this         SGT is likely caused either by a viral infection of the thyroid gland or
                      condition?                               by a postviral inﬂammatory process. Most patients will report an upper
                                                               respiratory infection that preceded the onset of neck pain by 2–8 weeks.
                                                               Whatever factors initiate SGT, the resulting thyroid inﬂammation

E N DOC RI NOLOGY
                                                               damages thyroid follicles and releases large quantities of T4 and T3 into
                                                               the circulation, producing clinical and biochemical hyperthyroidism.
                                                               The hyperthyroidism only lasts until the released T4 and T3 are
                                                               metabolized. This damage to thyroid follicular cells and inhibition of
                                                               TSH release by the elevated levels of T3 and T4 temporarily shuts down
                                                               synthesis of new thyroid hormones.
                     What is the natural history of this      SGT is characterized by a predictable course of thyroid function.
                      condition?                               Patients typically present in a hyperthyroid state lasting 2–8 weeks,
                                                               become euthyroid for a very short time, and then become hypothyroid
                                                               for another period of 2–8 weeks. The hypothyroidism lasts until the
                                                               thyroid gland can generate sufﬁcient thyroid hormones to restore
                                                               the patient to euthyroid status. Nearly all patients eventually recover
                                                               completely from SGT.
                     What conditions should be                The differential diagnosis includes acute infectious thyroiditis (AIT)
                      included in the differential             and hemorrhage into a thyroid gland. Both of these conditions can
                      diagnosis?                               cause severe thyroid pain and tenderness, but typically present as a
                                                               unilateral ﬂuctuant neck mass with lateralized signs and symptoms
                                                               (as opposed to bilateral and diffuse signs/symptoms in SGT). Also in
                                                               contrast to SGT, AIT commonly presents with acute onset of pain with
                                                               fever and chills, accompanied by normal thyroid function tests.
                     What is the most appropriate             Treatment is directed at alleviating thyroid pain and mitigating
                      treatment for this condition?            the symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Pain relief can be provided with
                                                               nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs with or without prednisone.
                                                               Patients suffering from hyperthyroidism may beneﬁt from β-blockers
                                                               while they are in the thyrotoxic (early) phase of SGT.

                    100
Epidemiology and
Preventive Medicine

Case 1                102

Case 2                104

Case 3                106

Case 4                108

Case 5                109

Case 6                110

Case 7                112

Case 8                114

Case 9                116

Case 10               118

Case 11               120

Case 12               121

                            101
                    CASE 1                    A physician reading a weekly medical journal comes across the results of a case-control
                                               study designed to identify risk factors for cerebral vascular accidents (CVAs). The study
                                               reports a signiﬁcant association between CVAs and the routine use of sleeping pills
                                               (odds ratio = 0.62, p ≤ 0.035). Before recommending that his patients stop using these
                                               to address insomnia, the physician decides to present the article for discussion at his
                                               monthly journal club to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the study.

                    What types of bias may occur in          Bias, a systematic error that occurs in a study and leads to a distorted
                     this study?                              estimate of association between exposure and risk of disease, is
                                                              generally classiﬁed into two categories: selection bias and information
                                                              (or observational) bias. Selection bias is any error that occurs due to the
                                                              way in which subjects are sampled or identiﬁed. Information bias refers
                                                              to any error that occurs in the process of collecting data and measuring
                                                              information. Types of information bias include recall bias, interviewer
                                                              bias, loss to follow-up bias, and misclassiﬁcation bias. In case-control
                                                              studies, the types of bias that tend to arise are recall bias and selection
                                                              bias.

                    What type of bias may cause              Misclassiﬁcation bias is a type of information bias that occurs when
                     under- or overestimation of the          subjects are inaccurately categorized with respect to exposure or
                     true association?                        disease. Differential misclassiﬁcation bias occurs when the proportion
                                                              of misclassiﬁed subjects is nonrandom or the direction or magnitude of
                                                              bias is not the same in all subjects (i.e., misclassiﬁcation is more likely
                                                              to happen to subjects in one arm of a study compared to those assigned

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                                                              to the others); this can result in either an over- or underestimate of the
                                                              true association.
                    What type of bias would                  Nondifferential misclassiﬁcation bias occurs when there are errors in
                     potentially underestimate the true       categorizing subjects, but the errors are random and affect subjects
                     association?                             in all arms of a study equally. This results in increased similarities
                                                              between the exposed and nonexposed group. The true association
                                                              between exposure and outcome tends to be underestimated.
                    How does confounding affect the          Confounding is the effect of another factor on the exposure under
                     results of a study?                      study and outcome of interest. The confounding factor must be
                                                              associated with both the exposure of interest, and, independent of the
                                                              exposure, the factor must be a risk factor for the disease. Confounding
                                                              may lead to an over- or underestimation of the true association between
                                                              the exposure and outcome. Confounding may also lead to a change in
                                                              direction of the observed effect.
                    What methods may be used                 Bias is best avoided through careful study design and study conduct.
                     to account for bias and                  Sources of bias should be identiﬁed, and the potential effects of bias
                     confounding?                             on the results should be addressed. Confounding may be controlled
                                                              during study design and statistical analysis. Subject restriction,
                                                              matching, or randomization may be used to control for confounding,
                                                              depending on the study design, and stratiﬁed analysis or multivariate
                                                              analysis may be used during data analysis.

                   102
 How are associations classiﬁed?   An association may be true (causal) or false (due to confounding). In
                                    causal associations, a change in the exposure causes a change in the
                                    exposure directly or indirectly through a series of intermediate steps. In
                                    associations due to confounding, a spurious relationship is established
                                    between the exposure of interest and the outcome due to the action of
                                    a confounder.
 How are causal relationships      Causal relationships are categorized by the exposure’s necessity and
  classiﬁed?                        ability to cause the outcome. The exposure is deemed necessary and
                                    sufﬁcient, necessary but not sufﬁcient, sufﬁcient but not necessary, or
                                    neither sufﬁcient nor necessary to cause the outcome.

                                                                                                                 E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                          103
                    CASE 2                     An employee at a federal government building in Washington, D.C., begins to
                                                experience symptoms that include a fever of 38.3°C (101.0°F), chills, headache,
                                                backache, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Within 4 days, the symptoms are followed
                                                by the development of a rash characterized by deep-seated, ﬁrm or hard, round, well-
                                                circumscribed vesicles. The lesions on the patient’s arms appear to be in the same stage
                                                of development as those on his abdomen. Further investigation reveals that a suspicious
                                                package arrived in the ofﬁce of the employees 2 weeks before the symptoms began.

                    What is the most likely diagnosis?       Smallpox. Smallpox is caused by the variola virus and is most efﬁciently
                                                              spread by the respiratory system as well as via direct contact. It invades
                                                              and multiplies, staying clinically silent for 12 days; a prodrome of
                                                              constitutional symptoms begins a few days before a rash appears on the
                                                              face and spreads proximal to distal. The usual cause of mortality (30%)
                                                              is toxemia. Since 1978, there have been no reported cases.

                    What criteria are important for          Smallpox is diagnosed based on a combination of major and/or minor
                     diagnosis of this condition?             criteria as deﬁned by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                                                              (CDC). High-risk features include (1) a fever 38.3°C (101.0°F) or
                                                              greater 1–4 days before the onset of rash with headache, backache,
                                                              prostration, chills, vomiting, or severe abdominal pain, (2) deep seated
                                                              round vesicles or pustules that may become umbilicated or conﬂuent,
                                                              and (3) lesions on multiple parts of the body at the same stage of
                                                              development, as seen in the patient above.

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                    What conditions should be                Varicella, disseminated herpes zoster, impetigo, drug eruption,
                     included in the differential             contact dermatitis, erythema multiforme minor, erythema multiforme,
                     diagnosis?                               enteroviral infections, disseminated herpes simplex, scabies, insect
                                                              bites, molluscum contagiosum.
                    What is the most appropriate             Local and state health ofﬁcials, as well as the CDC, should be
                     treatment for this condition?            contacted and consulted once the diagnosis of smallpox is suspected.
                                                              The patients should be placed into contact and airborne precautions.
                                                              Patient contacts should then be vaccinated. Vaccinia immune
                                                              globulin may be given for postexposure prophylaxis (within 1–3 days of
                                                              exposure), but there is limited data supporting its effectiveness, and the
                                                              supply is too small to be readily available during a smallpox outbreak.
                                                              There are no currently established treatments for smallpox, but some
                                                              experimental therapies are being evaluated.
                    What other agents may be used in         According to the CDC, the highest priority agents (Category A) are
                     bioterrorist attacks?                    those that can be easily disseminated or transmitted, result in high
                                                              mortality, and have the potential for a major public health impact;
                                                              these include anthrax, botulism, and smallpox. Category B agents are
                                                              moderately easy to disseminate and cause moderate morbidity and low
                                                              mortality; these include Brucella and ricin toxin. Category C agents
                                                              include emerging pathogens that have the potential to be engineered
                                                              for mass dissemination with the potential for high morbidity and
                                                              mortality; these include Nipah virus or hantavirus.

                   104
 What steps should be taken when      Bioterrorist attacks may be overt or covert in nature. Once a bioterrorist
 a bioterrorist attack is suspected?   attack has been identiﬁed, the appropriate steps that should be taken
                                       include the following:
                                        Surveillance to identify new cases.
                                        Public health response.
                                        Conﬁrmation and diagnostic testing.
                                        Decontamination and therapy (including prophylaxis and vaccines).
                                        Infection control and preparation for psychological effects of the
                                          attack.

                                                                                                                    E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                            105
                    CASE 3                     A 45-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for her annual checkup.
                                                She has no current medical complaints, but she is concerned about her risk for breast
                                                cancer, as a good friend was recently diagnosed with the disease. The patient’s family
                                                history is remarkable for breast cancer in her paternal aunt, who was diagnosed at age
                                                66. There is no other family history of cancer.

                    What are the major risk factors for       Age: Increasing age is the primary risk factor for breast cancer, as
                     breast cancer?                              85% of breast cancers occur in women over age 50.
                                                               Estrogen exposure: Women with a greater exposure to estrogen are
                                                                at an increased risk for breast cancer. Factors contributing to greater
                                                                estrogen exposure include age at menarche (< 12), age at ﬁrst birth
                                                                (> 35), and late menopause.
                                                               Genetic predisposition: A positive family history presents a modestly
                                                                increased risk, but in women with multiple ﬁrst-degree relatives with
                                                                premenopausal breast cancer, the risk of breast cancer may be as
                                                                high as 50%. This risk is associated with defects in the BRCA1 and
                                                                BRCA2 genes.
                                                              Protective factors include breast-feeding, multiparity, exercise, late
                                                              menstruation, early menopause, and oophorectomy prior to age 35.

                    What is the epidemiology of this         The incidence of breast cancer has doubled over the last 60 years. It is
                     condition?                               estimated that the lifetime probability of a woman developing breast
                                                              cancer is one in six. Breast cancer is second only to lung cancer in
                                                              cancer mortality among women. The mortality rates have declined

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                                                              over the last decade, but the decline has been greater among white
                                                              women than black women. The estimated mortality rates from 1998–
                                                              2002 for white women was 25.9/100,000 while the rate for African-
                                                              American women was 34.7/100,000.
                    What are the different options for       The three currently used methods for breast cancer screening
                     breast cancer screening?                 are breast self-examination, mammography, and clinical breast
                                                              examination. Upcoming screening technologies include full-ﬁeld
                                                              digital mammography, computer-assisted detection systems designed to
                                                              recognize mammographic patterns, and magnetic resonance imaging
                                                              for women at high risk for breast cancer.
                    What are the current                     Self-breast exams are recommended for women beginning in their
                     recommendations for breast               early 20s, with a clinical breast exam every 3 years. Starting at age 40,
                     cancer screening?                        yearly clinical examinations and mammograms should be performed.
                                                              For women at high risk, the patient and provider should discuss how
                                                              early prior to age 40 to begin yearly clinical exams with mammogram
                                                              and MRI given the risk for false-positive studies and overdiagnosis.
                                                              Women should be carefully instructed on how to perform breast self-
                                                              exams and be educated about the beneﬁts and limitations of breast
                                                              self-exams.

                   106
 What are potential harms from   The sensitivity of mammography screening is between 70% and 90%
  screening?                      (depending on a woman’s age and breast density). This means that
                                  10–30% of cases of breast cancer are missed at each screening (false-
                                  negative result). The speciﬁcity of mammography is > 90%. However,
                                  up to 10% of cases of “cancer” detected by mammography are not
                                  truly cancer (false-positive mammogram result). This can lead to more
                                  invasive diagnostic procedures as well as the psychological effects of
                                  potentially having breast cancer. Another concern with breast cancer
                                  screening is the potential for overdiagnosis. Overdiagnosis refers to
                                  conditions that would not have become clinically signiﬁcant and
                                  would not have been detected if not for screening. This may result in
                                  unnecessary treatments as well as psychological consequences.

                                                                                                           E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                    107
                    CASE 4                       A student working on her degree in public health plans to study the association between
                                                  maternal vaginal infections during gestation and the development of schizophrenia in
                                                  offspring. In preparation for her committee meeting, she must have a preliminary study
                                                  design prepared. She has access to a large database of obstetric records with 30-year
                                                  follow-up data on the mothers and offspring.

                    What is the most feasible study            Retrospective cohort study. In cohort studies, subjects are classiﬁed
                     design given the available                 based on the presence or absence of an exposure. In a retrospective
                     information?                               cohort study, all of the events of interest (exposure and outcome) have
                                                                already occurred. In a prospective cohort, the exposures may have
                                                                occurred, but the outcome has not yet occurred.

                    What are the advantages of this            The major strengths of a cohort study design are the ability to study
                     study design?                              rare exposures and the ability to study multiple effects of a single
                                                                exposure. In prospective cohort studies, another major strength is the
                                                                ability to minimize selection bias.
                    What are the limitations of this           The limitations of cohort studies include high costs, the need for large
                     type of study design?                      sample sizes to study rare diseases, and the potential for bias resulting
                                                                from loss to follow-up.
                    How do prospective and                     Prospective cohort studies tend to be more expensive and time
                     retrospective cohort studies               consuming since the subjects must be followed forward in time until
                     compare?                                   the outcome of interest develops. However, the potential for bias in

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                                                                assessing exposures and outcomes is often less. Retrospective cohort
                                                                designs tend to be more efﬁcient for studying diseases with long latency
                                                                periods. These studies may be limited, however, by the reliance on
                                                                data that was collected in the past: the desired data to answer the study
                                                                question may not be available.
                    What potential biases are                   Bias in the assessment of an outcome: assignment of subjects to a
                     associated with cohort studies?              “disease” or “no disease” cohort is affected by the evaluator’s prior
                                                                  knowledge of who was exposed and who was not exposed.
                                                                 Information bias: the quality and extent of information collected is
                                                                  different for exposed and nonexposed persons.
                                                                 Bias from nonresponse and losses to follow-up: this can complicate
                                                                  the interpretation of study ﬁndings; for example, incidence rates in
                                                                  the exposed and nonexposed cohorts will be difﬁcult to interpret.
                                                                 Analytic bias: strong preconceptions held by statisticians and
                                                                  epidemiologists analyzing the data may unintentionally introduce
                                                                  bias into the study.
                    What other study designs could be          Another observational study design is the case-control study. Case-
                     considered?                                control studies are usually retrospective studies in which subjects are
                                                                classiﬁed based on disease status. “Cases” have the disease; “controls”
                                                                do not have the disease. Information is then collected regarding
                                                                exposures to various etiologic factors. The advantages of the case-
                                                                control study are smaller sample sizes, lower cost, ability to study rare
                                                                disease, and the ability to measure multiple etiologic factors. The
                                                                limitations to a case-control study include recall or survivorship bias as
                                                                well as the inability to measure prevalence, incidence, or relative risk.

                   108
 CASE 5                   A 50-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for a physical examination. He
                           has not seen a physician in over 20 years. He was given a membership to the local gym
                           as a birthday present and feels that he should be medically evaluated before starting his
                           workouts. He weighs 78 kg (172 lb) and is 183 cm (72 in) tall with a BMI of 24 kg/m2,
                           blood pressure of 140/90 mm Hg, and heart rate of 86/min.

 What health care screening             Patients aged 25–64 years should have the following screening
  measures should be performed?          measures performed:
                                          Height and weight: every year.
                                          Blood pressure: every year.
                                          Dental checkup: every year.
                                          Screen for alcohol abuse and depression: every year.
                                          HIV testing: every year.
                                          Vaccination review: every year for inﬂuenza, update tetanus/pertussis.
                                          Fecal occult blood test (FOBT) and digital rectal examination: every
                                           year starting at age 50
                                          Pap smear and bimanual pelvic examination (for women: every year
                                           starting when sexually active or at age 18).
                                          Eye exam: every 2–4 years, baseline exam at age 40.
                                          Cholesterol level: every 5 years.
                                          Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy: every 5 years starting at age 50 (or
                                           age 40 for high-risk patients, i.e., ﬁrst-degree relative with history of
                                           colon cancer).

                                                                                                                       E PI DE M IOLOGY
 What are the current                    LDL: value < 100—optimal; 100–129—near optimal;
  recommended cholesterol levels?           130–159—borderline high; 160–189—high; ≥ 190—very high.
                                          HDL: value < 40—low; ≥ 60—high.
                                          Total: value < 200—desirable; 200–239—borderline high; ≥ 240—
                                            high.
 What are the current                   The 7th report of the Joint National Committee proposed the
  recommendations for blood              following:
  pressure values?                        Normal blood pressure: systolic < 120 mm Hg and diastolic
                                           < 80 mm Hg.
                                          Prehypertension: systolic 120–139 mm Hg or diastolic
                                           80–89 mm Hg.
                                          Stage 1 hypertension: systolic 140–159 mm Hg or diastolic
                                           90–99 mm Hg.
                                          Stage 2 hypertension: systolic ≥ 160 mm Hg or diastolic
                                           ≥ 100 mm Hg.
 What cancer screening measures          Skin examination: every year for patients aged 40 and older.
  are recommended for patients age        Prostate examination: every year for men aged 50 and older.
  50 and older?                           Clinical breast examination: every year for females aged 40 and
                                            older.
                                          Mammography: every year for females aged 50 and older.
                                          Pap smears: every year if sexually active or older than 18 years, and
                                           starting at age 30, every 3 years after three consecutively normal
                                           smears.
                                          Fecal occult blood test/digital rectal examination: every year for
                                           patients aged 50 and older.
                                          Flexible sigmoidoscopy: every 5 years for patients aged 50 and older
                                           or 40 and older for high-risk patients.

                                                                                                                109
                    CASE 6                     A medical student conducts a study on gastrointestinal (GI) ulcers in a randomly
                                                chosen group of traders who work on the ﬂoor of the New York Stock Exchange. He
                                                enrolls a cohort of traders at the beginning of the ﬁscal year and will follow them for
                                                one year, contacting them each month to see if any of them has had any episodes of
                                                chronic epigastric pain that had brought them to see a physician for diagnostic workup.
                                                After one year, the cases of conﬁrmed GI ulcer are tabulated and the results are shown
                                                below:

                                                                                    CASES OF GI ULCER (Total)      TOTAL NUMBER OF TRADERS

                                                   Start of year                                2                            100

                                                   End of year                                 32                             85

                                                Note: 15 traders could not be contacted after 6 months.

                    What is the prevalence of ulcers at           Disease prevalence refers to the number of individuals in a population
                     the start of the study?                       who have a disease at a speciﬁc point in time. Prevalence estimates the
                                                                   risk or probability that an individual in the population will have the
                                                                   disease at the given point in time. Prevalence is calculated using the
                                                                   following formula:

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                                                                              Number of existing cases of disease at a given time point
                                                                      P=
                                                                                                   Total population
                                                                   For the case presented, P = 2/100 = 0.02 × 100 = 2%

                    When calculating incidence of                 Incidence refers to the number of new cases or events that occur in
                     disease, how is the denominator               a population at risk during a given time period. It is important to
                     deﬁned?                                       remember when calculating incidence that only the population at
                                                                   risk should be used in the denominator. In the case presented, the
                                                                   population at risk for developing a GI ulcer at the start of the ﬁrst year
                                                                   is 100 – 2 = 98; two people already had an ulcer at the start of the study.
                    What is the cumulative incidence              Cumulative incidence is a measure of incidence deﬁned as the
                     of ulcers during the ﬁrst year?               proportion of individuals who develop disease during a speciﬁc time
                                                                   period. It provides an estimate of the risk for developing disease
                                                                   during the speciﬁed time (i.e., one year). The formula for calculating
                                                                   cumulative incidence is:
                                                                                Number of new cases of disease at a given time point
                                                                     CI =
                                                                                  Total population at risk during given time period
                                                                   For the case presented, CI = (32 − 2)/(85 − 2) = 36.1%

                   110
 What is the incidence rate of   Incidence rate refers to the rate of development of a disease in a
  ulcers in this study?           population:
                                              Number of new cases of disease at a given time point
                                    IR =
                                                        Total person − time of observation
                                  Total person-time of observation is the sum of each individual’s time
                                  at risk for the disease. It can also be thought of as the time each person
                                  was under observation and free from disease. In the case presented,
                                  98 individuals were disease-free at the start of the study. However, 15
                                  people were lost from the study after 6 months. There were 83 people
                                  remaining who were followed for 1 year. This yields 90.5 person-years
                                  of observation for the denominator (83 people followed for 1 year
                                  + 15 person followed for 0.5 year). The resulting incidence rate is
                                  30/90.5 person-years = 33.1%. Incidence rates can be used to estimate
                                  cumulative incidence if the incidence rate is low or if the time period
                                  under observation is short.

                                                                                                               E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                        111
                    CASE 7                      A 65-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for her yearly checkup.
                                                 After the physician takes a detailed history of her chronic ailments, including
                                                 emphysema and high blood pressure, she asks if the patient has received an inﬂuenza
                                                 shot for the present year. The patient responds by saying, “Last year, the nursing home
                                                 where I live made me get one, and it made me come down with the ﬂu, so I don’t
                                                 want it.” After educating the patient that the inﬂuenza vaccine is the single best way to
                                                 protect against inﬂuenza, the patient agrees to receive one.

                    How is the inﬂuenza vaccine                At present there are two options available: the traditional “ﬂu shot”
                     administered?                              intramuscular injection and an intranasal spray vaccine. The injectable
                                                                vaccine contains an inactivated killed virus; it is usually given in the
                                                                arm and is approved for persons older than 6 months who are healthy
                                                                or have chronic medical conditions. The spray contains live attenuated
                                                                inﬂuenza virus that does not cause inﬂuenza. The nasal spray is
                                                                approved for healthy persons between the ages of 2 and 49 years old.

                    When should the inﬂuenza                   For adults, the inﬂuenza vaccine is given one time once annually
                     vaccine be given?                          usually starting in September or whenever it becomes available during
                                                                the inﬂuenza season. Although the timing and duration of inﬂuenza
                                                                seasons vary depending on location, the ﬂu season usually peaks in
                                                                January or later. There is no beneﬁt in delaying vaccination.
                    What risk factors make this                This patient has several risk factors:
                     patient a priority to receive an            Age > 50 years.

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                     inﬂuenza vaccine?                           Chronic medical conditions: emphysema and high blood pressure.
                                                                 Lives in a nursing home.
                                                                Other individuals who should get vaccinated are those who are aged
                                                                6 months to 19 years old, pregnant women, health care workers, and
                                                                those who are in contact with those at high risk for complications from
                                                                inﬂuenza.
                    Who should not receive the                 These populations are not recommended to receive an inﬂuenza shot:
                     inﬂuenza vaccine?                           People who have a severe allergy to chicken eggs.
                                                                 People who have had a severe reaction to a previous inﬂuenza
                                                                  vaccination.
                                                                 People who have developed Guillain-Barré syndrome within
                                                                  6 months of receiving the vaccine.
                                                                 Children < 6 months of age.
                                                                 People who have moderate to severe illness with fever (vaccination
                                                                  should be postponed until symptoms have resolved).
                    What adverse events are associated         Side effects from the injection last only 1–2 days and can include
                     with inﬂuenza vaccination?                 soreness at the site of injection, low-grade fever, and aches. Side effects
                                                                from the intranasal vaccine may include runny nose, headache, sore
                                                                throat, and cough.

                   112
 How is the spread of disease    Endemic: the rate of a disease stays the same within a given
  classiﬁed epidemiologically?     population, but some minor ﬂuctuations may occur over time.
                                  Epidemic: the rate of a disease spreading though a population is
                                   greater than expected, i.e., plague in Europe, AIDS in Africa.
                                  Pandemic: an epidemic that occurs over several countries and affects
                                   a sizeable proportion of people in each.
 How are preventative health     Primary: measures to prevent the disease from occurring, such as
  measures classiﬁed?              vaccines.
                                  Secondary: measures to enhance early detection of disease and
                                   intervention.
                                  Tertiary: measures to reduce the impact of disease and promote
                                   quality of life.

                                                                                                            E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                      113
                    CASE 8                      A 24-year-old white woman presents to her family physician for an annual examination.
                                                 The patient has always been somewhat overweight, but her weight has increased
                                                 signiﬁcantly since her last visit. She is 163 cm (5'3") tall and weighs 91 kg (200 lb).
                                                 The patient does not express concern about her weight gain. She states that she enjoys
                                                 eating “good food and lots of it” and that she has little desire to exercise. She works in
                                                 customer relations and spends most of her day sitting at a desk answering phone calls.

                    What is the patient’s body mass            The body mass index is calculated with the following formula: BMI =
                     index (BMI)?                               body weight (in kg)/height (in meters2). BMI is helpful in determining
                                                                the degree of excess weight and thus distinguishing obesity (the
                                                                presence of excess body fat) from being overweight (having a weight
                                                                above the normal range). These BMI cutoffs for overweight and obesity
                                                                vary by race. For Caucasians, overweight is deﬁned as a BMI between
                                                                25 and 29.9 kg/m2, while obesity is deﬁned as a BMI > 30 kg/m2.
                                                                Severe or morbid obesity is deﬁned as a BMI > 40 kg/m2. For this
                                                                patient, her BMI is 34.2 kg/m2.

                    What are some of the recognized            The major factors contributing to obesity are a sedentary lifestyle and
                     causes of obesity?                         increased caloric intake. Other causes include smoking cessation,
                                                                drug-induced weight gain (e.g., insulin, certain antipsychotic
                                                                medications, certain anticonvulsant drugs), neuroendocrine obesity
                                                                (polycystic ovarian syndrome, Cushing’s syndrome, hypothalamic
                                                                obesity), and genetic and congenital disorders (leptin deﬁciency,
                                                                Prader-Willi syndrome).

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                    What is the role of fat distribution       Abdominal obesity (central obesity) increases the risk for heart disease,
                     in assessing risk for obesity-related      diabetes, hypertension, and certain cancers (such as breast cancer)
                     morbidity?                                 in women. Abdominal obesity is generally assessed by measuring
                                                                waist circumference. For adults with a BMI of 25–34.9 kg/m2, waist
                                                                circumference of > 102 cm (40 in) for men or > 88 cm (35 in) for
                                                                women is considered high risk. For patients with a BMI > 35 kg/m2 the
                                                                value of these cutoff points is less clear.
                    What comorbid conditions are                Cancer (breast, colon, endometrial, esophageal, kidney, prostate)
                     strongly associated with obesity?           Diabetes mellitus
                                                                 Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
                                                                 Heart disease
                                                                 Hypertension
                                                                 Osteoarthritis
                                                                 Dyslipidemia
                                                                 Gout
                                                                 Hepatobiliary disease
                                                                 Insulin resistance
                                                                 Stroke

                   114
 What are the therapeutic options     Obese and overweight patients should ﬁrst be evaluated for etiologic
  for treating obesity?                factors and comorbid conditions that require treatment. Patients
                                       should be counseled on diet, exercise, lifestyle, and weight loss goals.
                                       For obese patients who have failed to attain weight loss goals with diet
                                       and exercise, pharmacologic options are available. For individuals
                                       with a BMI > 40 kg/m2 or > 35 kg/m2 with other comorbidities who
                                       have failed to achieve weight loss goals with diet and exercise, bariatric
                                       surgery should be considered.
 What adverse events are associated   The adverse events are cardiac arrhythmias, electrolyte derangements
  with weight loss?                    (most importantly hypokalemia), hyperuricemia, and psychological
                                       sequelae including depression and the development of eating disorders
                                       (particularly binge-eating disorders).

                                                                                                                    E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                             115
                    CASE 9                        An international clinical research group would like to evaluate a new COX-2 inhibitor
                                                   that aims to limit prostaglandin production in HIV+ women as a means of preventing
                                                   the development of cervical cancer. The team wishes to enroll HIV+ women from sites
                                                   around the world and randomize them into two groups. One group will receive the
                                                   study drug, while the other group receives a nonactive pill that appears identical to the
                                                   study drug. Neither the investigators nor the subjects will know who is in which group
                                                   until the end of the study. The women will be followed for 5 years with regular cervical
                                                   exams every 6 months, using the development of in-situ cervical cancer as the outcome
                                                   measure.

                    What study design is being used              Randomized clinical trial (RCT). A RCT is a common type of
                     by the study investigators?                  experiment used to assess the efﬁcacy of a health care intervention or
                                                                  technology: in this case, a new pharmaceutical. This particular study
                                                                  is randomized in an attempt to equally distribute known and unknown
                                                                  confounders between the two groups. Since neither the subjects nor
                                                                  the investigators know who is receiving the study drug and who is
                                                                  receiving the placebo, the study is considered to be double-blinded
                                                                  and placebo-controlled. RCTs are considered the most reliable form of
                                                                  scientiﬁc research since they reduce spurious causality and bias.

                    Why is it important that the                 In order to control for as many variables as possible in the study, the
                     placebo resemble the study drug?             placebo drug should resemble the study drug in as many ways as
                                                                  possible (size, color, taste, etc). This is an attempt to control for the
                                                                  placebo effect, a measureable effect on the condition under study

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                                                                  attributed to taking an inert pill not expected to have any effect.
                    What components are necessary                 The subject must have the capacity to make a decision.
                     for informed consent?                         The medical investigator must disclose information about the study
                                                                    in question.
                                                                   The subject must comprehend the relevant information.
                                                                   The subject must be able to voluntarily grant consent, without
                                                                    coercion.
                    What is a possible null hypothesis           Given the study description above, a possible null hypothesis (the
                     and alternative hypothesis for the           assumption at the outset of an experiment that no difference exists
                     study?                                       between the two groups) is: “The study drug has no signiﬁcant effect
                                                                  over placebo in this population.” A possible alternative hypothesis
                                                                  (statement that opposes the null hypothesis) is: “The study drug has a
                                                                  signiﬁcant effect over placebo in this population.”
                    What types of error exist in                 Type I error is a rejection of the null hypothesis when it is in fact true.
                     hypothesis testing?                          In this case, if in reality, the study drug was no better than placebo but
                                                                  the investigator concluded that it was, they would be committing type
                                                                  I error. Type II error, considered less serious, occurs when the null
                                                                  hypothesis is not rejected when it is in fact, false. In this case, if the
                                                                  investigators concluded that the study drug was no better than placebo,
                                                                  but it actually was, they would be committing Type II error.

                   116
 What scale is being used to   In a study, there are many scales on which variables can be expressed:
  measure the outcome?           Nominal: variable that is determined by categories that cannot be
                                  ordered (i.e., hair color: blond, brown, gray, etc.).
                                 Ordinal: variable in which the order but not the distance between
                                  data points can be determined (i.e., low, medium, high).
                                 Continuous: variable that may have fractional values (i.e., age of
                                  subjects).
                                 Interval: variable in which the order and distance between data
                                  points can be determined (i.e., salaries: $5000, $10,000, $15,000,
                                  etc.).
                                 Discrete: variable that is measured solely in whole units
                                  (i.e., integers).
                                In this case, the outcome for each patient can be described as
                                developing cancer or not developing cancer; thus, it is a nominal
                                variable.

                                                                                                         E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                   117
                    CASE 10                     A 52-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician after suspicious
                                                 microcalciﬁcations were observed in her left breast tissue during a regular screening
                                                 mammogram. She has been informed that a procedure will be necessary to make a
                                                 deﬁnitive diagnosis, but she would like to undergo the least invasive procedure that
                                                 will still yield a diagnosis. A friend of hers recently had a ﬁne-needle aspiration biopsy
                                                 (FNA) done, and the patient would like to know if this is a good diagnostic test. The
                                                 results of a study comparing surgical excisional biopsy, the gold standard for obtaining a
                                                 diagnosis, and FNA follow below:

                                                                                       SURGICAL BIOPSY

                                                  RESULTS OF FNA                   CANCER                 NO CANCER                TOTAL

                                                  Positive                           16                       6                     22

                                                  Negative                            2                      88                     90

                                                  Total                              18                      94                    112

                    What are the possible outcomes            For any test with only positive or negative results, four possible results
                     of the ﬁne-needle aspiration,             may occur:
                     assuming the test results may only         True positive: test result is positive, and individual actually has

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                     be positive or negative?                    disease.
                                                                False positive: test result is positive, but individual does not have
                                                                 disease.
                                                                False negative: test result is negative, but individual does in fact have
                                                                 disease.
                                                                True negative: test result is negative, and individual does not have
                                                                 disease.

                                                                   TEST RESULT       DISEASE                          NO DISEASE

                                                                   Positive          True positive (a)                False positive (b)

                                                                   Negative          False negative (c)               True negative (d)

                    What are two common                       Sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Sensitivity is the probability that a diseased
                     parameters used to measure                patient will have a positive test result. Speciﬁcity is the probability that
                     the validity of a diagnostic or           a nondiseased person will have a negative test result. A sensitive test
                     screening test?                           is good for ruling out disease because the number of false-negative
                                                               tests is low (SnOUT), while a speciﬁc test is good for ruling in disease
                                                               because the number of false-positive tests is low (SpIN). A test with high
                                                               sensitivity is a good screening test while a test with high speciﬁcity is a
                                                               good conﬁrmatory test. An ideal test has both a high sensitivity and high
                                                               speciﬁcity, but there is often a trade-off between the two.

                   118
 Calculate the sensitivity and                                               a
  speciﬁcity of the FNA test.                                Sensitivity =        × 100%
                                                                           a+c
                                                                           16
                                      Or in this case:       Sensitivity =     × 100% = 88.9%
                                                                           18
                                                                             d
                                                             Speciﬁcity =         × 100%
                                                                           b+d

                                                                             88
                                      Or in this case:       Speciﬁcity =         × 100% = 93.6%
                                                                             94

 How do sensitivity and speciﬁcity   The higher the sensitivity of a diagnostic test, the less likely a person
  affect predictive value for the     with a negative test will actually have the disease; therefore, the
  same disease population?            negative predictive value of the test will be greater. The higher the
                                      speciﬁcity of a diagnostic test, the less likely a person with a positive
                                      test will be disease free; therefore, the positive predictive value will be
                                      greater.

                                                                                                                     E PI DE M IOLOGY

                                                                                                               119
                    CASE 11                     A medical researcher has developed a tool to evaluate the effectiveness of new
                                                 international health research training programs in encouraging medical students to
                                                 pursue careers in international health. The evaluation is compared against currently
                                                 measured external criteria such as length of training, quality of mentorship, length of
                                                 time spent training abroad, foreign language training, productivity of research faculty,
                                                 and student satisfaction; the endpoint evaluated is the number of students who, over
                                                 time, incorporate international health into their career. The tool is administered to a
                                                 select group of international health training programs for further evaluation.

                    In order to be useful, this testing        An important feature of a test or instrument is validity. Validity refers
                     system must be valid. What does it         to whether a test is measuring what it intends to measure. Validity is
                     mean to have a valid test?                 also known as accuracy. In the case presented, the testing instrument
                                                                is considered valid if higher evaluation scores successfully predict a
                                                                greater number of medical students incorporating international health
                                                                into their careers.

                    In regards to a measurement, what          Reliability, or precision, is another important feature of an assessment
                     is reliability?                            tool or test. Reliability refers to the reproducibility of results or the
                                                                consistency of measurements. Two important types of reliability are
                                                                inter-rater reliability and test-retest reliability. Test-retest reliability
                                                                refers to the similarity in test results when a single person interprets the
                                                                test results repeatedly. Inter-rater reliability refers to how similar the
                                                                results of a test are when the tests are interpreted by different people.

E PI DE M IOLOGY
                    How would this case demonstrate            In the case presented, the test would demonstrate test-retest reliability
                     test-retest reliability?                   if there is a high correlation between scores for a program evaluated
                                                                on two separate occasions (there must be no changes in the program
                                                                between these time periods that would be expected to change the
                                                                outcome).
                    How would this case demonstrate            In the case presented, the test would demonstrate high inter-rater
                     inter-rater reliability?                   reliability if two separate test evaluators produce similar scores based on
                                                                the observed qualities of the program.

                   120
 CASE 12                     A new three-dimensional MRI imaging technique for the detection of renal artery
                              stenosis has been developed. After positive results in small studies, it is being tested
                              versus renal artery angiogram (the gold standard study for the diagnosis of renal artery
                              stenosis) in 1000 women aged 35–55 years old with cardiac risk factors. The results are
                              shown below. The prevalence of the disease being screened for in this population is
                              10%.

                                                                  ANGIOGRAM RESULT

                               3D MRI RESULT             POS                  NEG                   TOTAL

                               Positive                   90                   40                    130

                               Negative                   10                  860                    870

                               Total                     100                  900                   1000

 How is positive predictive value          Positive predictive value, or the probability that an individual actually
  (PPV) calculated?                         has a disease given a positive test result, is calculated by dividing the
                                            total true positives by the total number with a positive test:

                                                                                                                            E PI DE M IOLOGY
                                              TEST RESULT           DISEASE                NO DISEASE

                                              Positive              True Positive (a)      False Positive (b)

                                              Negative              False Negative (c)     True Negative (d)

                                                                                a
                                            Using the above table, PPV =            × 100
                                                                             a+b
                                                                                 90
                                            For the diagnostic above, PPV =           × 100 = 69.2%
                                                                                130
                                            This means that approximately 7 out of 10 people with a positive test
                                            result will actually have the disease.

 How is negative predictive value          Negative predictive value, or the probability that a person does not have
  (NPV) calculated?                         the disease given a negative test result, is calculated by dividing the total
                                            number of true negatives by those who tested negative:
                                                                                d
                                            Using the table above, NPV =        × 100%
                                                                          c+d
                                                                             860
                                            For the diagnostic above, NPV =       × 100% = 98.9%
                                                                             870
                                            This means that almost everyone who tests negative for disease is truly
                                            disease free.
 How does disease prevalence               For a given sensitivity and speciﬁcity, diagnostic tests for diseases with a
  affect the predictive value of a          high prevalence will have a higher positive predictive value than tests
  diagnostic test?                          for rare disease. Thus, the positive predictive value of a test for a rare
                                            condition can be increased by targeting groups that are at higher risk for
                                            developing the disease.

                                                                                                                    121
      E PI DE M IOLOGY

122

                         N OT E S
Ethics and Legal Issues

Case 1               124

Case 2               125

Case 3               126

Case 4               127

                           123
           CASE 1                      A 53-year-old woman with a known diagnosis of breast cancer presents to her primary
                                        care physician complaining of lower back pain. A bone scan reveals “hot spots” in the
                                        L3–5 region, and a CT scan of the lower back conﬁrms metastases to the bone. The
                                        patient requests that her husband not be informed of these new ﬁndings, as she does not
                                        want him or any other members of her family to know the extent of her disease.

           What is the rule of                       Information disclosed by a patient to his or her physician as well
            conﬁdentiality?                           as information about a patient’s medical or surgical condition is
                                                      conﬁdential. A physician may not disclose such information to a third
                                                      party without the expressed consent of the patient.

           Can this right be waived?                 A patient may waive the right to conﬁdentiality, as in the case of
                                                      information disclosed to an insurance company. A physician, however,
                                                      may not waive this right without the patient’s expressed consent.

           What is the Tarasoff decision?            If a patient intends to commit a violent crime, a physician has the duty,
                                                      as stated by the Tarasoff rule, to warn and protect the intended victim
                                                      through reasonable means.
           What are the ﬁve other                     A suicidal patient.
            circumstances in which a                   A situation involving child or elder abuse.
            physician’s ethical and legal              A patient with a reportable infectious disease (e.g., a physician is
            responsibilities override the rule          obligated to notify the appropriate health departments of all cases of
            of conﬁdentiality?                          tuberculosis).
                                                       A patient with a gunshot or stab wound (the police should be

ETH ICS
                                                        notiﬁed).
                                                       A patient who is impaired as an automobile driver.

           What is the rule of disclosure?           Patients have the right to full disclosure regarding their medical status,
                                                      prognosis, and treatment options. A physician cannot withhold such
                                                      information from a patient, even with the expressed request from the
                                                      patient’s family members.
           When may a physician withhold             A physician may only withhold medical information from a patient
            information from a patient?               in the event that the patient explicitly requests not to be told or when
                                                      the physician determines that full disclosure will adversely affect the
                                                      patient’s condition or the patient’s decision-making capacity. This is
                                                      termed therapeutic privilege.

          124
 CASE 2                       A 67-year-old woman is unresponsive in the intensive care unit 2 weeks after sustaining
                               anoxic injury to her brain. The patient has a known history of dilated cardiomyopathy
                               with atrial ﬁbrillation, for which she was closely monitored and taking several
                               medications. Her husband found her unresponsive on the ﬂoor in their home upon
                               returning from work 2 weeks ago. The patient has maintained a relatively normal
                               cardiac rhythm since admission to the hospital but has evidence of severe cardiac
                               compromise.

 What are examples of life-                 Life-sustaining interventions include assisted ventilation, nutrition and
  sustaining interventions?                  ﬂuid administration, and medicinal treatments, including antibiotics
                                             and dialysis. A patient has the right to refuse such interventions.
                                             Additionally, there is no ethical or legal difference between withholding
                                             and withdrawing these interventions.

 What is an advance directive, and          A written advance directive, such as a living will, is a documented
  how is it binding?                         request by a patient that indicates the patient’s wishes to withhold
                                             or withdraw medical treatment in the event of terminal illness
                                             or a persistent vegetative state. Patients may designate speciﬁc
                                             requests, including a request for DNR (do not resuscitate) or DNI
                                             (do not intubate). A patient’s family and physicians have the ethical
                                             responsibility to respect a patient’s written advanced directive.
 Who should represent a patient             Any patient who lacks capacity for decision making requires a surrogate
  who lacks decision-making                  decision maker to represent him or her, regardless of whether or not
  capacity regarding end-of-life             the patient has a written advance directive. Surrogate decision makers
  decisions?                                 are given priority in the following order:

                                                                                                                           ETH ICS
                                              A person holding a durable power of attorney (a legal document
                                               whereby an individual designates someone to act on his or her behalf
                                               should that individual become disabled or incapacitated).
                                              A person designated orally or informally by the patient.
                                              A person designated by a state-mandated hierarchy (e.g., spouse,
                                               adult child, etc.).
                                              A person who is willing to serve in the surrogate role and who knows
                                               the patient’s preferences and life goals.

 Is the use of palliative care always       Palliative treatment is treatment given for the speciﬁc purpose of
  ethical and legal?                         providing relief from pain and suffering. It is always ethical and legal
                                             to provide palliative care, even when the treatment provided may
                                             inadvertently hasten the patient’s death.
 What is physician-assisted suicide         Physician-assisted suicide involves a physician prescribing a lethal agent
  (PAS), and is it currently legal?          to a patient for the speciﬁc purpose of the patient self-administering the
                                             agent to end his or her own life. PAS is currently illegal in the United
                                             States except in Oregon.
 What is euthanasia, and is it              Euthanasia is the administration of a legal agent with the intent of
  currently legal?                           ending the life of the individual receiving the agent. Euthanasia is
                                             opposed by the AMA Code of Medical Ethics and is currently illegal
                                             in the United States. It is not an acceptable method of alleviating
                                             a patient’s pain. Any patient requesting euthanasia should be
                                             immediately evaluated for inadequate pain control and comorbid
                                             depression.

                                                                                                                     125
           CASE 3                      A 38-year-old man presents to an oncologist after being recently diagnosed with non-
                                        Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The patient is the father of three young children and is notably
                                        distraught. He and his wife wish for “everything possible to be done.” The physician
                                        begins to obtain informed consent for a speciﬁc treatment regimen.

           Who has the right to refuse or            Only patients with proven decision-making capacity have the right
            accept treatment?                         to accept, refuse, or discontinue treatment. Incompetent patients
                                                      or temporarily incapacitated patients (e.g., intoxicated patients or
                                                      medically sedated patients) cannot refuse or discontinue treatment.

           What is decision-making                   Decision-making capacity refers to the ability of a patient to appreciate
            capacity?                                 his or her medical or surgical condition and its consequences,
                                                      understand information that is relevant to the condition, deliberate
                                                      rationally about his or her values, and communicate a voluntary choice.
           In the process of obtaining               A physician must explain the nature of the intervention, the
            informed consent from a patient,          indication(s) for the intervention, the risks and beneﬁts of the
            what must the physician explain?          intervention, and any alternative options, including the option of no
                                                      treatment. The patient must willingly accept, without any element of
                                                      coercion, the medical or surgical intervention before a physician may
                                                      proceed.
           What are the two circumstances            When emergency treatment is necessary, consent is implied. Once the
            in which informed consent is not          patient has been stabilized, formal written consent may be obtained.
            required from a patient?
                                                      When patients lack decision-making capacity, informed consent may
                                                      be obtained from a surrogate decision make (i.e., a family member or
ETH ICS
                                                      legal guardian).
           When may a physician                      A physician is not ethically obligated to provide an intervention when
            refuse a patient’s request for            it is deemed futile. Thus, a physician may refuse a patient’s or a family’s
            interventions?                            request for further intervention(s) in the event that the following
                                                      conditions are met:
                                                       There is no medical indication for the intervention.
                                                       Maximal intervention is currently failing.
                                                       A given intervention has previously failed.
                                                       There is an established process available to the patient or family
                                                         if s/he/they wish to continue to seek the intervention (e.g.,
                                                         transfer their care to another provider who will offer the desired
                                                         intervention).

          126
 CASE 4                     A 16-year-old girl presents to her pediatrician with her mother, complaining of vague
                             abdominal pain. She states that her pain began early this morning and that it is not
                             associated with any nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or abnormal vaginal discharge. Her
                             last menstrual period was 3 weeks ago. She is afebrile and healthy appearing, although
                             she is noticeably anxious. The pediatrician asks the mother to step out of the room to
                             have a few moments alone with the patient, and upon further questioning, the patient
                             admits to having recently had her ﬁrst sexual encounter. She is concerned about being
                             pregnant.

 From whom must the physician             Physicians must receive consent to provide medical treatment from
  receive consent to treat a minor?        the patient if she or he is 18 years of age or older and from the patient’s
                                           legal guardian, usually a parent, if the patient is a minor. If the patient
                                           is an emancipated minor (see below), the patient may consent for his
                                           or her treatment.

 Who is an emancipated minor?             Minors are emancipated if they are married or in the armed services.
                                           They are additionally considered emancipated for the purposes of
                                           obtaining medical care for pregnancy, sexually transmitted infections,
                                           and drug or alcohol abuse.
 How does the rule of                     Physicians have the obligation to discuss the medical care of a minor
  conﬁdentiality apply to a minor?         with the minor’s legal guardian. If, however, the minor is emancipated,
                                           then the rule of conﬁdentiality between physician and patient can only
                                           be broken with the explicit permission of the patient or if the patient is
                                           deemed a danger to him- or herself or another.

                                                                                                                         ETH ICS
 May a parent refuse medical              A parent has the right to refuse medical treatment for his or her child
  treatment for his or her child?          provided that the lack of treatment does not pose a serious threat to
                                           the health of the child. For example, a parent has the right to refuse
                                           immunizations, as the lack of immunizations is not considered a
                                           serious threat to the child’s safety.
 What happens in emergency                In an emergency situation, consent for treatment of a minor is implied
  situations?                              when parents cannot be contacted. If parents request that treatment
                                           be withheld even though withholding treatment may jeopardize the
                                           child’s safety, the physician may initiate treatment against the parents’
                                           wishes based on legal precedent.

                                                                                                                  127
                N OT E S

ETH ICS

          128
Gastrointestinal

Case 1             130

Case 2             132

Case 3             134

Case 4             135

Case 5             136

Case 6             138

Case 7             139

Case 8             140

Case 9             141

Case 10            142

Case 11            144

Case 12            146

Case 13            148

Case 14            150

Case 15            151

Case 16            152

Case 17            153

Case 18            154

Case 19            156

Case 20            157

Case 21            160

Case 22            162

                         129
                      CASE 1                    A 42-year-old obese woman presents to the emergency department with abdominal pain
                                                 of several hours’ duration. The pain began shortly after she ate a slice of pizza at her
                                                 son’s birthday party. She describes the pain as constant and localized to the upper right
                                                 side of her abdomen. She admits to having previous episodes of similar pain but adds
                                                 that these episodes spontaneously resolved within a few hours. Physical examination
                                                 reveals a temperature of 38.3°C (100.9°F), pulse of 113/min, and blood pressure of
                                                 126/82 mm Hg. Abdominal examination is signiﬁcant for right upper quadrant
                                                 tenderness with a positive Murphy’s sign. A complete blood count reveals a mild
                                                 leukocytosis of 15.2/mm3. An abdominal ultrasound is shown in Figure 6-1.

GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                 FIGURE 6-1.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar
                                                 TR, Dunn DL, Hunger JG, Matthews JB, Pollock RE, Schwartz SI. Schwartz’s Principles of
                                                 Surgery, 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 31.14.)

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?       Acute cholecystitis. Acute cholecystitis refers to gallbladder
                                                                inﬂammation due to prolonged obstruction of the cystic duct, usually
                                                                by a gallstone. Patients often have a history of biliary colic, especially
                                                                after fatty food ingestion. Risk factors for acute cholecystitis include
                                                                the “5 F’s”—Female, Fat (obesity), Fertile (risk increases during
                                                                pregnancy), Forty (middle-aged), and Fair (Caucasian).

                      What are the signs and symptoms          Symptoms are typically more severe and of longer duration than those
                       of this condition?                       of biliary colic and include:
                                                                 Anorexia.
                                                                 Inspiratory arrest on deep palpation of the right upper quadrant
                                                                  (Murphy’s sign).
                                                                 Low-grade fever.
                                                                 Mild icterus and rebound tenderness.
                                                                 Nausea.
                                                                 Right upper quadrant pain referred to the right scapula.
                                                                 Vomiting.

                     130
 What tests and/or imaging tools   Abdominal ultrasound conﬁrms the diagnosis by demonstrating
  could be used to conﬁrm the       gallstones, bile duct dilatation, gallbladder wall thickening, and
  diagnosis?                        pericholecystic ﬂuid (see Figure 6-1). A sonographic Murphy’s sign
                                    is both sensitive and speciﬁc. The absence of the gallbladder on
                                    nuclear imaging (HIDA), despite the presence of isotope in the liver
                                    and duodenum, is also diagnostic and remains the gold standard.
                                    Laboratory studies often reveal a mild leukocytosis and elevated serum
                                    bilirubin and aminotransferases. Abdominal plain ﬁlms are rarely
                                    diagnostic since only 10–15% of gallstones are radiopaque.
 What is the most appropriate      Patients should be treated with inpatient ﬂuid resuscitation, antibiotics,
  treatment for this condition?     and analgesics. Cholecystectomy is the deﬁnitive treatment and, ideally,
                                    is performed laparoscopically within 2–3 days of onset of symptoms.
                                    Preoperative endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
                                    or intraoperative cholangiogram is also recommended to rule out
                                    the presence of choledocholithiasis. Patients with signiﬁcant medical
                                    problems can be managed medically with a 4–6-week delay in surgical
                                    treatment. Critically ill patients who are ineligible for surgery should be
                                    treated with percutaneous cholecystostomy.

                                                                                                                  GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                          131
                      CASE 2                     A 42-year-old man presents to the emergency department because of pain in his back
                                                  and around his umbilicus. The pain began 2 days ago after a long night of drinking
                                                  at his favorite bar. He admits to vomiting twice in the past several hours, with only
                                                  slight relief of his pain. His temperature is 38.3°C (100.9°F), pulse is 114/min, and
                                                  blood pressure is 92/62 mm Hg. On physical examination, he appears anxious and
                                                  is leaning forward in bed with his knees bent. Abdominal examination is notable for
                                                  epigastric tenderness. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings include a WBC count of 15.2/mm3,
                                                  hemoglobin of 16.2 g/dL, and serum amylase of 950 U/L.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?       Acute pancreatitis. Acute pancreatitis is secondary to cholelithiasis
                                                                or alcohol abuse in up to 90% of cases. Biliary pancreatitis is most
                                                                commonly seen in women older than 50 years, while alcoholic
                                                                pancreatitis is seen in men between 35 and 45 years old. The overall
                                                                prevalence of acute pancreatitis is low and is estimated at 0.5%.

                      What is the etiology of this              Alcoholism.
                       condition?                                Gallstones (most common cause).
                                                                 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
                                                                 Hereditary (typically in patients aged < 20 years).
                                                                 Hypercalcemia.
                                                                 Hypertriglyceridemia (triglycerides typically > 1000 mg/dL).
                                                                 Idiopathic.
                                                                 Medication side effects (e.g., thiazide diuretics, azathioprine,

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                                  6-mercaptopurine, sulfonamides, estrogen).
                                                                 Scorpion stings (Tityus trinitatis in Trinidad).
                                                                 Trauma.
                                                                 Viral infections.

                      What are the signs and symptoms          Acute pancreatitis: Acute pancreatitis presents with epigastric or
                       of this condition?                       periumbilical abdominal pain that radiates to the back, chest, ﬂanks,
                                                                and abdomen. The pain is exacerbated by the supine position.
                                                                Nausea, vomiting, abdominal distention, low-grade fever, tachycardia,
                                                                and hypotension are often found on physical examination. Signs of
                                                                volume depletion indicate severe pancreatitis and should be managed
                                                                aggressively. Presence of a Cullen sign (periumbilical discoloration)
                                                                or a Grey Turner sign (ﬂank discoloration) suggests retroperitoneal
                                                                hemorrhage from the pancreatitis.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools          Acute pancreatitis is associated with increased serum amylase and
                       could be used to conﬁrm the              lipase levels, although these can be normal or even low. Leukocytosis,
                       diagnosis?                               hypocalcemia, and hyperglycemia are also common in acute or
                                                                chronic pancreatitis. In the presence of normal serum amylase, a CT of
                                                                the abdomen may conﬁrm the diagnosis.
                      What is the most appropriate             Acute pancreatitis is a self-limiting condition and often subsides within
                       treatment for this condition?            1 week of treatment. Treatment includes removal of the offending
                                                                agent, if possible. Bowel rest is the mainstay of therapy. Other measures
                                                                include analgesics for pain, aggressive volume resuscitation, and
                                                                nasogastric suction. Enteral nutrition is preferred over parenteral
                                                                nutrition when possible.

                     132
 What are the complications                    Complications of acute pancreatitis include pseudocysts, ﬁstula
  associated with this condition?               formation, hypocalcemia, renal failure, pleural effusion (infected),
                                                pancreatic phlegmon/abscess, and sepsis. The risk of mortality
                                                secondary to acute pancreatitis can be predicted by scoring systems
                                                such as Ranson’s criteria, Glasgow’s criteria, and APACHE II scores.
                                                Ranson’s criteria is shown in Table 6-1.

                                    TA B L E 6 - 1 .   Ranson’s Criteria for Predicting Mortality Risk in Acute Pancreatitis

                                       ON ADMISSION: GA LAW             AFTER 48 HOURS: C HOBBS          RISK OF MORTALITY

                                       Glucose > 200 mg/dL              Calcium < 8.0 mg/dL              20% with 3–4 signs

                                       Age > 55 years                   Hematocrit decrease > 10%        40% with 5–6 signs

                                       LDH > 350 IU/L                   Oxygen PaO2< 60 mm Hg            100% with ≥ 7 signs

                                       AST > 250 IU/dL                  Base excess < 4 mEq/L

                                       WBC > 16,000/mm3                 BUN increase > 5 mg/dL

                                                                        Sequestered ﬂuid > 6 L

                                                                                                                                     GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                                               133
                      CASE 3                    A 39-year-old G2P2 woman presents to her primary care physician with a sensation of
                                                 undigested food in the back of her throat and chest pain following meals. She reports
                                                 difﬁculty swallowing solids and liquids that started during her last pregnancy but has
                                                 continued over the past year following delivery. On multiple occasions, she has found
                                                 undigested food on her pillow in the morning. She reports losing 1.8 kg (12 lb) over
                                                 the past 2 months due to the discomfort she feels after eating. She has been taking
                                                 famotidine and omeprazole for her symptoms but reports no relief. Her physical exam is
                                                 normal. Her abdomen is nontender, nondistended, and soft, with normal bowel sounds.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?      Achalasia. Achalasia is thought to be due to degeneration or scarring
                                                               of the esophageal myenteric plexus of Auerbach. Primary idiopathic
                                                               achalasia accounts for the majority of cases seen in the United States.
                                                               Secondary achalasia may be caused by gastric carcinoma inﬁltrating
                                                               the esophagus, lymphoma, Chagas’ disease, and neurodegenerative
                                                               disease. The loss of inhibitor neurons that produce nitric oxide and
                                                               vasoactive intestinal peptide leads to uninhibited cholinergic neurons
                                                               and failure of the lower esophageal sphincter to relax or generate
                                                               coordinated peristaltic waves.

                      What are the symptoms associated        Achalasia has equal incidence in men and women. Frequent symptoms
                       with this condition?                    include weight loss, cough, dysphagia, and diffuse chest pain.
                                                               Dysphagia to solids and liquids is suggestive of motility disorders (i.e.,
                                                               achalasia and diffuse esophageal spasm [DES]), whereas dysphagia to

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                               only solids suggests mechanical obstruction (i.e., tumor or Schatzki’s
                                                               rings).
                      How is this condition diagnosed?        Achalasia is diagnosed by barium swallow study and manometry.
                                                               A barium swallow demonstrating a dilated esophagus with a sharp
                                                               tapering “bird’s beak” is characteristic of achalasia, whereas a
                                                               “corkscrew pattern” is suggestive of DES. Manometry reveals normal to
                                                               elevated pressures in the distal esophagus.
                      What is the most appropriate            Treatments for achalasia include agents that dilate the distal esophagus
                       treatment for this condition?           (nitroglycerin, anticholinergic agents, calcium channel blockers,
                                                               opioids), local botulinum toxin injections, balloon dilatation, and
                                                               sphincter myotomy.

                     134
 CASE 4                    A 42-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a chief complaint
                            of ﬂushing. These episodes arise suddenly and spontaneously, without any trigger
                            she can identify. These episodes usually last about a minute. However, she describes
                            one episode that continued for about 15 minutes. During these episodes, the skin on
                            her chest and face becomes very red, with a mild burning feeling. Over the past few
                            weeks, she has also had increasing problems with diarrhea and has had up to 20 watery,
                            nonbloody stools per day, accompanied by intense abdominal cramping. She denies any
                            health problems prior to these complaints, which began a few months ago. On physical
                            examination, she appears comfortable with normal vital signs. Faint wheezes are heard
                            on her lung exam. She has mildly hyperactive bowel sounds, but her abdomen is soft
                            and nontender. A 24-hour urine collection is obtained and found to contain 274 mg of
                            5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA; normal 2–8 mg/day).

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Carcinoid syndrome. Carcinoid syndrome is characterized by ﬂushing
                                          episodes, diarrhea, wheezing, and right-sided cardiac valvular
                                          lesions, and is due to hormone production by the enterochromafﬁn
                                          cells in a carcinoid tumor. Symptoms may follow exertion, excitement,
                                          or eating but often have no known trigger. Carcinoid tumors are
                                          typically located in the small intestine, and the hormones produced are
                                          then cleared by the liver. The presence of carcinoid syndrome signiﬁes
                                          hepatic metastasis or primary bronchial location of the carcinoid
                                          tumor.

                                                                                                                       GASTROI NTESTI NAL
 What is the pathogenesis of this        Carcinoid tumors are composed of enterochromafﬁn cells, which
  condition?                              synthesize and secrete a variety of humoral factors, most commonly
                                          serotonin, histamine, and prostaglandins. Serotonin stimulates
                                          intestinal motility and secretion and thus is thought to be responsible
                                          for the diarrhea. It may also stimulate cardiac valve ﬁbrosis. Excess
                                          serotonin levels can be measured by the excretion of its metabolite,
                                          5-HIAA, in the urine. Histamine, produced by primary gastric
                                          carcinoid tumor, is thought to cause the ﬂushing seen in carcinoid
                                          syndrome.
 What tests and/or imaging tools         In any patient with unexplained ﬂushing and diarrhea, the urine
  could be used to conﬁrm the             should be tested for 5-HIAA excretion, which is very sensitive
  diagnosis?                              and speciﬁc test for carcinoid syndrome. Unfortunately, the test is
                                          frequently complicated by the ingestion of certain foods and drugs.
                                          If results are equivocal, whole blood serotonin concentration can be
                                          determined. The carcinoid tumor itself can be localized by chest and
                                          abdominal CT scans.
 What is the most appropriate            Octreotide is a somatostatin analogue that neutralizes serotonin and
  treatment for this condition?           therefore improves symptoms. The ideal treatment of a carcinoid
                                          tumor involves complete surgical resection; this will result in resolution
                                          of all symptoms. In the case of hepatic metastases, surgical debulking
                                          will improve symptoms. Chemotherapy, typically with 5-ﬂuorouracil
                                          and doxorubicin, may also be used.
 What is the prognosis for patients      Patients with localized tumors are estimated to have a 95% 5-year
  with this condition?                    survival rate, which drops to 80% for those with hepatic metastases.
                                          Average survival time on octreotide therapy is approximately 12 years.

                                                                                                               135
                      CASE 5                     A 76-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with 2 months of abdominal
                                                  pain. He reports bloating, diarrhea, fatigue, and an unintentional weight loss of 6.8 kg
                                                  (15 lb). Vital signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse of 75/min, and
                                                  blood pressure of 118/74 mm Hg. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings include a hemoglobin
                                                  level of 8.4 g/dL, a WBC count of 10.0/mm3, and a positive fecal occult blood test.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?        Colon cancer. Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer
                                                                 deaths in the United States. The incidence is similar in men and
                                                                 women and increases with age, peaking at 70–80 years of age. The
                                                                 diagnosis should be suspected in elderly patients with iron deﬁciency
                                                                 anemia.

                      What risk factors are associated          Risk factors include age, family or personal history of colorectal cancer,
                       with an increased incidence of            inﬂammatory bowel disease, adenomatous polyps, and a high-fat, low-
                       this condition?                           ﬁber diet. Rare hereditary syndromes such as familial adenomatous
                                                                 polyposis (APC), Gardner’s disease, and hereditary nonpolyposis colon
                                                                 cancer (HNPCC) carry a particularly high risk. Ulcerative colitis
                                                                 carries a higher risk than does Crohn’s disease. Villous, sessile colon
                                                                 polyps progress to cancer more frequently than tubular, pedunculated
                                                                 polyps.
                      What are the signs and symptoms           Change in bowel habits, with or without abdominal pain, is the most
                       of this condition?                        common presenting symptom. Signs and symptoms of anemia and

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                                 the presence of blood in the stool are also common. Most colorectal
                                                                 cancers are asymptomatic, but symptoms, if present, vary with the
                                                                 location of the lesion. Right-sided lesions present with anemia
                                                                 from chronic occult blood, while left-sided lesions present with
                                                                 constipation and blood-streaked stools. Rectal lesions present with pain,
                                                                 hematochezia, and tenesmus.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools           Colonoscopy is the gold standard for diagnosis. Air-contrast barium
                       could be used to conﬁrm the               enema (as shown in Figure 6-2) is performed if colonoscopy is
                       diagnosis?                                incomplete. Complete blood count may demonstrate microcytic
                                                                 anemia, and stool occult blood is positive.
                      What is the most appropriate              Cancer should be staged with contrast CT of the abdomen and
                       treatment for this condition?             colonoscopy with or without endoscopic ultrasound for low
                                                                 rectal tumors. Surgical resection is standard treatment, and
                                                                 adjuvant chemotherapy is used with lymph node involvement.
                                                                 Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels are not diagnostic but are
                                                                 useful for tracking response to treatment and disease progression and
                                                                 should be measured preoperatively. Recurrence or new tumors can be
                                                                 identiﬁed with serial CEA levels, colonoscopy, and abdominal imaging.

                     136
FIGURE 6-2.      Barium enema roentgenogram of an encircling carcinoma
of the descending colon presenting an “apple core” appearance. (Repro-

                                                                               GASTROI NTESTI NAL
duced, with permission, from Doherty GM, Way LW. Current Surgical Diagno-
sis & Treatment, 12th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 30-9.)

                                                                         137
                      CASE 6                     A 14-year-old girl presents to her pediatrician with abdominal bloating and pain,
                                                  watery diarrhea, and a blistering rash that has persisted for the past week. The rash is
                                                  distributed across her elbows and knees. She also notes that over the past week she has
                                                  unintentionally lost 2.3 kg (5 lb) and seems to bruise easily. She denies any fever, chills,
                                                  recent camping trips, travel, or change in diet. Physical exam is notable for short stature
                                                  and delayed puberty. She is at the 40th percentile for height and Tanner Stage I for
                                                  breast development, and she has not had her ﬁrst menstrual period. Her abdomen is
                                                  slightly distended and diffusely tender to palpation. Peritoneal signs are absent. On her
                                                  lower right leg is a golf ball–size hematoma. Labs are negative for fecal leukocytes and
                                                  blood.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?        Celiac disease. Celiac disease is a gluten-induced enteropathy that
                                                                 affects the small intestine and leads to malabsorption. Glutens are a
                                                                 class of high-molecular-weight proteins that are found in wheat, rye,
                                                                 and barley. Celiac disease affects women more often than men (3:2)
                                                                 and is associated with the haplotypes HLA-DR3 and HLA-DQw2.

                      What conditions should be                 The differential includes tropical sprue, Whipple’s disease, and
                       included in the differential              lactase deﬁciency. Tropical sprue can be differentiated from celiac
                       diagnosis?                                disease by the inﬁltration of monocytes. In Whipple’s disease, periodic
                                                                 acid-Schiff (PAS)–positive macrophages inﬁltrate the bowel wall.
                                                                 Whipple’s disease can also be diagnosed by PCR of peripheral blood
                                                                 for Tropheryma whippelii. Lactase deﬁciency symptoms are commonly

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                                 seen acutely after consumption of diary products.
                      What are the symptoms associated          Patients present with diarrhea (50%), bloating, abdominal pain,
                       with this condition?                      steatorrhea, and weight loss. Iron deﬁciency anemia and evidence of
                                                                 a deﬁciency of fat-soluble vitamins (osteoporosis, coagulopathy) are
                                                                 common presentations. In children and adolescents, celiac disease can
                                                                 lead to stunted growth. Dermatitis herpetiformis is a pruritic rash that is
                                                                 also associated with celiac sprue.
                      Why does the patient have easy            Malabsorption leading to vitamin deﬁciencies, in this case vitamin K.
                       bruising and a hematoma?                  Anemia may also be present due to poor absorption of iron.
                      How is this condition diagnosed?          The disease is diagnosed by small bowel biopsy, which demonstrates
                                                                 characteristic ﬁndings of ﬂattened intestinal villi, lymphocyte
                                                                 inﬁltration, and hyperplasia and lengthening of intestinal crypts.
                      What is the most appropriate              Avoidance of gluten products will lead to resolution of symptoms
                       treatment for this condition?             within a few weeks. For severe cases, glucocorticoids can be
                                                                 administered.

                     138
 CASE 7                    An 83-year-old woman presents to the emergency department for abdominal pain.
                            She was in her usual state of health until approximately 8 hours ago, when she began
                            experiencing a crampy pain in the left lower quadrant of her abdomen. Since the
                            onset of her symptoms, she has vomited twice and has not had a bowel movement.
                            Physical examination reveals a temperature of 38.3°C (100.9°F), pulse of 109/min, and
                            blood pressure of 122/70 mm Hg. Abdominal examination is signiﬁcant for left lower
                            quadrant tenderness with guarding. Rectal examination is notable for rectal tenderness.
                            A complete blood count reveals a WBC count of 14.1/mm3, hemoglobin level of 13.1
                            g/dL, and platelet count of 200/mm3.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Diverticulitis. Diverticular disease is most common in the sigmoid
                                          colon and is caused by outpouchings of mucosa and submucosa that
                                          herniate through the colonic muscle layers. These outpouchings
                                          are considered to be false diverticula because they do not comprise
                                          all layers of the bowel wall. Diverticulosis refers to the presence of
                                          diverticula without inﬂammation. Diverticulitis refers to perforation
                                          of the diverticulum with resulting extraluminal pericolic infection
                                          and inﬂammation. Diverticulitis is estimated to occur in 10–25% of
                                          people with diverticulosis. Risk factors for diverticular disease include
                                          a low-ﬁber diet, connective tissue disorders, and advanced age.
                                          Approximately 50% of people over age 90 have diverticular disease. In
                                          contrast, it is uncommon for diverticular disease to present before age

                                                                                                                        GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                          40, and other diagnoses should be entertained.

 What are the signs and symptoms         Diverticulitis is classically associated with lower abdominal pain
  of this condition?                      that is gradual in onset and is localized to the left lower quadrant. A
                                          history of diverticulosis may be present. Low-grade fever, accompanied
                                          by tachycardia, may also be present. Other ﬁndings may include
                                          abdominal and/or rectal tenderness, a palpable abdominal mass,
                                          nausea, vomiting, and bowel habit changes. By contrast, diverticulosis
                                          is asymptomatic or presents with painless rectal bleeding and symptoms
                                          of anemia.
 What tests and/or imaging tools         Patients with diverticulitis frequently demonstrate an increased WBC
  could be used to conﬁrm the             count, with a prevalence of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Abdominal
  diagnosis?                              ﬁlms can show evidence of free air, ileus, or mass. CT of the abdomen
                                          and pelvis best conﬁrms the diagnosis of diverticulitis; common
                                          ﬁndings include a thickened colonic wall or an abscess. Invasive
                                          techniques such as barium enema or colonoscopy should be avoided in
                                          early diverticulitis due to increased risk of perforation and translocation
                                          of colonic bacteria.
 What is the most appropriate            Diverticulitis is treated with bowel rest, intravenous ﬂuids, and
  treatment for this condition?           intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics. A nasogastric tube is not
                                          needed unless there is signiﬁcant ileus or obstruction. Invasive
                                          studies, such as colonoscopy, should be delayed 4–6 weeks due
                                          to risk of perforation. Surgical resection of the affected bowel is
                                          not recommended after the ﬁrst episode of diverticulitis because
                                          of the low recurrence rate of 20–30%. Surgery may be considered
                                          after subsequent episodes. Diverticular bleeding usually resolves
                                          spontaneously but should be treated with transfusions and hydration,
                                          as needed. If the patient has a perforated diverticulum, immediate
                                          surgical resection is required. Patients with asymptomatic diverticular
                                          disease should be followed clinically and encouraged to adhere to a
                                          high-ﬁber diet.

                                                                                                                139
                      CASE 8                    A 66-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for difﬁculty swallowing.
                                                 Approximately 8 months ago, he began exclusively eating soft foods because of the
                                                 sensation of solid foods becoming “stuck” in his chest. He reports some anorexia and an
                                                 unintentional weight loss of 11.3 kg (25 lb) over the past several months. He admits to
                                                 smoking one pack of cigarettes daily for the past 35 years and drinking two beers a day
                                                 since he was 18 years old. Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.0°C
                                                 (98.6°F), pulse of 86/min, and blood pressure of 136/86 mm Hg. He appears cachectic.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?      Esophageal carcinoma, likely squamous. Squamous cell carcinoma
                                                               accounts for the majority of esophageal carcinomas worldwide,
                                                               although the incidence varies geographically. The incidence in the
                                                               United States is approximately 20 per 100,000. In Western societies,
                                                               smoking and alcohol consumption are strongly linked with squamous
                                                               cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma of the esophagus, once an unusual
                                                               malignancy, now accounts for over 50% of esophageal cancer in
                                                               Western countries. The increased incidence of adenocarcinoma is the
                                                               result of the well-established association between gastroesophageal
                                                               reﬂux, Barrett’s esophagus, and esophageal adenocarcinoma.

                      What are the signs and symptoms         Esophageal cancer is usually advanced once symptoms are present.
                       of this condition?                      Earlier on, esophageal cancer presents with weight loss and
                                                               anorexia. Dysphagia appears late in the disease. Esophageal cancer
                                                               usually extends locally. Extension of the primary tumor into the

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                               tracheobronchial tree can present as stridor. Other complications
                                                               of local invasion include tracheoesophageal ﬁstula, which can
                                                               present as coughing, choking, aspiration pneumonia, and vocal cord
                                                               compression, resulting in vocal changes. Distant metastases can cause
                                                               jaundice or bone pain.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools         Routine contrast radiographs can identify large, symptomatic
                       could be used to conﬁrm the             esophageal lesions. Esophageal carcinomas characteristically cause
                       diagnosis?                              ragged, ulcerating changes in the mucosa. Smaller, potentially
                                                               resectable tumors are often poorly visualized despite adequate
                                                               esophagograms. As a result, esophagoscopy should be performed to
                                                               visualize the tumor and obtain tissue biopsies when there is a high
                                                               suspicion of cancer. Esophagoscopy should be performed prior to
                                                               barium studies to maximize visualization of the tumor. Gastrograﬁn
                                                               is contraindicated if there is concern for a ﬁstula. The extent of
                                                               tumor spread to lymph nodes should also be assessed with chest
                                                               and abdominal CT and endoscopic ultrasound. Positron-emission
                                                               tomography scanning may be useful in assessing resectability.
                      What is the most appropriate            Fewer than 5% of patients with esophageal carcinoma are alive
                       treatment for this condition?           5 years after diagnosis. Treatment therefore focuses on symptom
                                                               control. Approaches to palliation include endoscopic dilatation of the
                                                               esophagus, gastrostomy or jejunostomy placement for nutrition, and
                                                               stent placement to bypass the tumor. Total resection of the tumor by
                                                               esophagectomy is feasible in only 45% of cases; esophagectomy has
                                                               a postoperative mortality rate of 5–10%, and residual tumor cells are
                                                               frequently present at the resection margins. Radiation therapy and/
                                                               or chemotherapy are beneﬁcial in some cases, but their use remains
                                                               controversial.

                     140
 CASE 9                    A 45-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for recurrent, burning chest
                            pain after meals. His pain worsens when he reclines and improves with over-the-counter
                            antacid tablets. He also reports a sour taste in his mouth and a persistent cough for the
                            past 6 months. He has smoked two packs of cigarettes daily for the past 20 years. His
                            temperature is 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse is 91/min, and blood pressure is 142/90 mm Hg.
                            He is 175 cm (69 in) tall and weighs 135 kg (298 lb). His physical examination is
                            unremarkable.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD). GERD is the symptomatic
                                          reﬂux of gastric contents into the esophagus due to incompetent barriers
                                          at the gastroesophageal junction. Studies suggest that 15% of individuals
                                          have symptoms of GERD weekly, and 7% have symptoms daily.

 What is the pathogenesis of this        Reﬂux occurs when the gradient of pressure between the lower
  condition?                              esophageal sphincter and the stomach is lost. This can be caused by
                                          an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter, gastroparesis, or hiatal
                                          hernia. Other causes include scleroderma, alcohol, caffeine, nicotine,
                                          fatty foods, or increased intra-abdominal pressure due to obesity or
                                          pregnancy.
 What are the signs and symptoms         The classic symptoms of GERD include heartburn and a sour taste
  of this condition?                      in the mouth (“water brash”). Reﬂux of gastric contents into the
                                          pharynx, larynx, and tracheobronchial tree can cause chronic cough,

                                                                                                                        GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                          bronchoconstriction, pharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis, or pneumonia.
                                          Chest pain occurs in some patients due to esophageal spasm.
 What other symptoms can this             Ten percent of patients undergoing endoscopy for GERD are
  patient expect to develop over            diagnosed with Barrett’s esophagus, a squamocolumnar metaplasia
  time?                                     of the esophageal epithelium that carries an increased risk
                                            (approximately 0.5% per year) of adenocarcinoma.
                                           Patients with chronic reﬂux are at increased risk for developing
                                            peptic strictures, which commonly presents as dysphagia.
                                           Upper gastrointestinal bleeding can occur due to mucosal erosions or
                                            Barrett’s ulcer.
 What tests and/or imaging tools         GERD is usually diagnosed by clinical history. A successful therapeutic
  could be used to conﬁrm the             trial with a proton pump inhibitor supports the diagnosis. Diagnostic
  diagnosis?                              studies are indicated in patients with persistent symptoms after 6-8 weeks
                                          of medical therapy. Mucosal damage can be documented by barium
                                          swallow study, esophagoscopy, and mucosal biopsy. Reﬂux can be
                                          assessed with ambulatory 24-hour esophageal pH recording. Esophageal
                                          motility studies may be useful in evaluating the competence of the lower
                                          esophageal sphincter and esophageal motor function.
 What is the most appropriate            Mild cases of GERD may be treated with lifestyle changes and over-
  treatment for this condition?           the-counter medications. Lifestyle modiﬁcations, including weight
                                          reduction, elevation of the head of the bed, and avoidance of tobacco,
                                          fatty foods, and alcohol, should be encouraged for all patients. Current
                                          recommendations are to add treatment with proton pump inhibitors
                                          (PPIs) for symptom relief in moderate to severe cases, with plans to
                                          “step down” to H2-receptor blocking agents after several months of
                                          PPI therapy. Laparoscopic fundoplication, in which the gastric fundus
                                          is wrapped around the esophagus, increases the lower esophageal
                                          sphincter pressure and should be considered for patients who require
                                          long-term medical therapy or who fail more conservative measures.

                                                                                                                141
                      CASE 10                   A 52-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for loss of libido that has
                                                 persisted over the past 6 months. He was diagnosed with diabetes 1 year ago, and he
                                                 has recently developed painful arthritis in his hands and ﬁngers. Physical examination
                                                 reveals a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse of 83/min, and blood pressure of 132/90
                                                 mm Hg. An abdominal examination reveals splenomegaly, and a genital examination
                                                 suggests testicular atrophy. Spider nevi are noted on his thorax. A cardiac examination
                                                 is unremarkable. His complexion is an odd grayish-brown hue. He denies any alcohol
                                                 consumption. Relevant lab ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                 Fe: 400 μg/dL
                                                 TIBC: 600 μg/dL
                                                 Serum ferritin: 500 ng/mL

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?      Hemochromatosis. Hemochromatosis is an autosomal recessive iron
                                                               storage disorder in which increased intestinal iron absorption causes
                                                               excessive iron deposition in the liver, adrenals, pancreas, testes, and
                                                               skin. The tissue damage caused by iron deposition results in the classic
                                                               symptoms of cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus, and hypogonadism. Patients
                                                               typically become symptomatic between 40 and 60 years of age. Men
                                                               are 10 times more likely to be affected, particularly those of northern
                                                               European descent.

                      What are the signs and symptoms         Early symptoms of hemochromatosis include weakness, abdominal

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                       of this condition?                      pain, loss of libido, and symptoms of diabetes mellitus. The liver is
                                                               usually the ﬁrst organ to be affected, and hepatomegaly is present
                                                               in > 95% of symptomatic patients. Excessive skin pigmentation is
                                                               common at the time of diagnosis and results from increased iron
                                                               deposits in the dermis. Arthropathy develops in 25–50% of patients,
                                                               with the joints of the hands being the ﬁrst involved (second and third
                                                               metacarpophalangeal joints are most commonly affected). Testicular
                                                               atrophy is seen due to the impairment of hypothalamic-pituitary
                                                               function by iron deposition and, later, because of end-stage liver
                                                               disease. Cardiac arrhythmias and congestive heart failure may be
                                                               present in advanced disease.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools         Laboratory diagnosis includes an elevated serum iron concentration, an
                       could be used to conﬁrm the             increased serum ferritin, and a transferrin saturation > 45%. Although
                       diagnosis?                              liver biopsy with hepatic iron index determination was previously
                                                               required, genetic testing for the C282Y mutation is now sufﬁcient for
                                                               diagnosis in the correct clinical setting. Liver biopsy may be important
                                                               in assessing the presence of cirrhosis or when the patient is not
                                                               homozygous for the C282Y mutation.
                      What is the most appropriate            Treating hemochromatosis requires removal of excess body iron and
                       treatment for this condition?           supportive treatment of damaged organs. Iron removal is achieved
                                                               by weekly phlebotomy. After the transferrin saturation and ferritin
                                                               level normalize, maintenance therapy can be initiated using periodic
                                                               phlebotomy or chelating agents such as deferoxamine. All ﬁrst-degree
                                                               relatives should be screened with a transferrin saturation and ferritin
                                                               level.

                     142
 What is the prognosis for patients   Removing excessive iron stores and maintaining them at near-normal
  with this condition?                 levels improves the 5-year survival rate from 33% to 89%. With
                                       repeated phlebotomy, hepatomegaly improves, pigmentation of the
                                       skin decreases, and cardiac failure may be reversed. Diabetes improves
                                       in about 40% of affected patients, but removal of excess iron has
                                       little effect on hypogonadism or arthropathies. Hepatic ﬁbrosis may
                                       decrease, but cirrhosis is irreversible; end-stage liver disease can be
                                       treated with orthotopic liver transplantation. Patients who are cirrhotic
                                       at presentation should also be screened for hepatocellular carcinoma.

                                                                                                                   GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                            143
                      CASE 11                   A 58-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for an employment physical
                                                 examination. His physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse
                                                 of 85/min, and blood pressure of 138/94 mm Hg. Abdominal and chest examinations
                                                 are unremarkable. An x-ray of the chest required for his employment physical is shown
                                                 in Figure 6-3.

GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                 FIGURE 6-3.       (Reproduced, with permission, from the Pathology Education Instructional
                                                 Resource Digital Library (http://peir.net) at the University of Alabama, Birmingham.)

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?       Hiatal hernia. A hiatal hernia is a herniation of part of the stomach into
                                                                the thoracic cavity through the esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm.
                                                                The incidence of hiatal hernias increases with age. The prevalence of
                                                                hiatal hernia is approximately 60% in the sixth decade of life.

                      How is this condition classiﬁed?         There are two types of hiatal hernias: sliding and paraesophageal. A
                                                                sliding hiatal hernia is characterized by the upward movement of the
                                                                gastroesophageal junction and the fundus into the mediastinum. In
                                                                contrast, a paraesophageal hiatal hernia, which is less common, occurs
                                                                when the gastroesophageal junction remains below the diaphragm, but
                                                                a portion of the fundus herniates into the mediastinum.

                     144
 What are the signs and symptoms   Many patients with hiatal hernias are asymptomatic. Sliding hiatal
  of this condition?                hernias can be associated with gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. In
                                    contrast, a paraesophageal hiatal hernia can present with symptoms
                                    of dysphagia and postprandial fullness. Many patients with
                                    paraesophageal hiatal hernias are anemic due to chronic bleeding
                                    from ulcerated gastric mucosa (Cameron’s lesions). Most signiﬁcantly,
                                    paraesophageal hiatal hernias may become incarcerated, requiring
                                    immediate surgery.
 What tests and/or imaging tools   Asymptomatic hiatal hernias are frequently diagnosed as incidental
  could be used to conﬁrm the       ﬁndings on upright chest x-rays (see Figure 6-3). This appears as
  diagnosis?                        an air-ﬂuid level behind the cardiac shadow. Barium studies or
                                    esophagoscopy can also conﬁrm the diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate      Sliding hiatal hernias are commonly treated with medical
  treatment for this condition?     therapies and lifestyle modiﬁcations that decrease the symptoms of
                                    gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. In these cases, the hernia itself is
                                    not treated. Paraesophageal hiatal hernias are typically repaired with
                                    surgical gastropexy, a procedure that attaches the stomach to the
                                    rectus sheath and closes the hiatus. This procedure prevents gastric
                                    incarceration.

                                                                                                               GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                         145
                      CASE 12                   A 25-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for recurrent abdominal
                                                 pain. She describes having daily episodes of crampy, lower abdominal pain and
                                                 diarrhea for the past 6 months. Her diarrhea has occasionally been bloody, and she
                                                 has experienced an unintentional weight loss of 4.5 kg (10 lb) over the past 3 months.
                                                 She adds that she had a subjective fever several nights last week. Physical examination
                                                 reveals a temperature of 37.8°C (100.1°F), pulse of 96/min, and blood pressure of
                                                 108/66 mm Hg. She appears thin but is in no acute distress. An abdominal examination
                                                 reveals diffuse tenderness, and a rectal examination is signiﬁcant for frank blood.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?      Inﬂammatory bowel disease, likely ulcerative colitis (UC).
                                                               Inﬂammatory bowel disease is an idiopathic, chronic inﬂammation of
                                                               the intestines. Crohn’s disease (CD) and UC are the two major types
                                                               of inﬂammatory bowel disease. UC is a mucosal disease that usually
                                                               involves the rectum and extends proximally to involve all or part of the
                                                               colon. It most commonly presents at 20–25 years of age and is more
                                                               common in Caucasians, especially Ashkenazi Jews. CD is a transmural
                                                               process that can affect any segment of the gastrointestinal tract from
                                                               the mouth to the anus. It has a bimodal age distribution, with the ﬁrst
                                                               peak occurring between 15 and 30 years and a second peak occurring
                                                               between the ages of 60 and 80. Women are affected slightly more often
                                                               than men, and it is most common in Caucasians and Ashkenazi Jews.
                                                               Smoking increases the risk of CD, whereas smoking decreases the risk

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                               of UC.

                      What are the signs and symptoms         Patients with CD often experience abdominal pain, low-grade fever,
                       of this condition?                      weight loss, and watery diarrhea. Rectal involvement (e.g., perianal
                                                               ﬁssures, ﬁstulas) and upper gastrointestinal symptoms are also
                                                               common. In contrast, UC is characterized by diarrhea (often bloody),
                                                               tenesmus, and crampy abdominal pain. Extraintestinal manifestations
                                                               of IBD occur in nearly 10% of affected patients and include arthritis,
                                                               episcleritis, uveitis, erythema nodosum (more common with CD) and
                                                               pyoderma gangrenosusm (more common with UC).
                      What tests and/or imaging tools         Patients suspected of having inﬂammatory bowel disease should have a
                       could be used to conﬁrm the             complete blood count, abdominal plain ﬁlms, and a stool examination
                       diagnosis?                              for bacteria, Clostridium difﬁcile toxin, and ova and parasites (which
                                                               should be negative). Colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy can be useful, but
                                                               deﬁnitive diagnosis is made by biopsy. Colonoscopy in CD may show
                                                               aphthoid, linear, or stellate ulcers, strictures, cobblestoning, and skip
                                                               lesions. Colonoscopy in UC may show diffuse and continuous rectal
                                                               involvement with friable mucosa, edema, and pseudopolyps. Single-
                                                               contrast barium enema can also show the early radiologic changes of
                                                               inﬂammatory bowel disease. Evidence of terminal ileal involvement
                                                               can be detected with peroral pneumocolon or small bowel follow
                                                               through.

                     146
 What is the most appropriate         The mainstay of therapy for mild to moderate UC and CD is
  treatment for this condition?        sulfasalazine and mesalamine (5-ASA) with the exact formulation
                                       depending on the target site of action. Corticosteroids and
                                       immunosuppressants are used to treat refractory disease and to induce
                                       remission in moderate to severe disease. Total colectomy is curative for
                                       long-standing UC or toxic megacolon. Surgical resection is not curative
                                       for CD, as the disease may recur anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract.
                                       However, surgery may be required to treat local complications of the
                                       disease.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Patients with long-standing diagnoses of UC carry an increased risk
  with this condition?                 of colorectal cancer. As such, after 8 years of disease, patients should
                                       undergo frequent monitoring with fecal occult blood screening and
                                       colonoscopy. The incidence of secondary malignancy is signiﬁcantly
                                       lower in CD.

                                                                                                                   GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                             147
                      CASE 13                   A 46-year-old man presents to the emergency department for having three episodes of
                                                 hematemesis during the past 3 hours. He admits to many years of alcohol and heroin
                                                 abuse. Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.8°C (100.1°F). He has a pulse
                                                 of 102/min and blood pressure of 116/70 mm Hg while supine, and a pulse of 115/min
                                                 and blood pressure of 90/56 mm Hg while upright. Abdominal examination reveals
                                                 a distended abdomen with splenomegaly, caput medusae, and a ﬂuid wave. He is
                                                 anicteric, and spider angiomata are present on his thorax. Neurological examination is
                                                 unremarkable. Relevant labs are as follows:
                                                 Albumin: 2.0 g/d
                                                 Bilirubin: 3.0 mg/d
                                                 PT: 25 seconds
                                                 LAST: 200 U/L
                                                 LALT: 250 U/L

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?      Liver cirrhosis. Cirrhosis of the liver is caused by hepatocellular
                                                               injury, which leads to ﬁbrosis with nodular regeneration and loss of
                                                               lobular architecture. Clinical features result from liver dysfunction,
                                                               portosystemic shunting, and portal hypertension. The most common
                                                               causes of cirrhosis are alcohol and chronic viral hepatitis. Other causes
                                                               include nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, hemochromatosis, Wilson’s
                                                               disease, α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency, primary biliary cirrhosis, and
                                                               congestive heart failure.

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                      What are the signs and symptoms         Weakness, muscle cramps, and weight loss are common symptoms.
                       of this condition?                      Advanced cirrhosis may cause anorexia, nausea, vomiting, amenorrhea,
                                                               impotence, and gynecomastia. Presenting symptoms include
                                                               hematemesis in 15–25% of cases and fever in up to 35% of cases.
                                                               Splenomegaly is seen in 35–50% of cases, while hepatomegaly is rare;
                                                               cirrhosis typically results in a small, shrunken liver. Skin manifestations
                                                               include spider angiomata, palmar erythema, and Dupuytren’s
                                                               contractures. Caput medusae or hemorrhoids may appear as superﬁcial
                                                               veins dilate secondary due to intrahepatic obstruction of portal blood
                                                               ﬂow. The main clinical manifestations of cirrhosis are encephalopathy
                                                               and ascites, which are late ﬁndings. Other late ﬁndings include pleural
                                                               effusions, peripheral edema, ecchymotic lesions, and jaundice.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools         Blood chemistries reﬂect liver dysfunction, with modest elevations
                       could be used to conﬁrm the             of aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin.
                       diagnosis?                              Prothrombin time prolongation may result from impaired synthesis of
                                                               clotting factors. Hypoalbuminemia may also be present. Liver biopsy
                                                               conﬁrms the presence of cirrhosis. Ultrasound, CT, or MRI may assess
                                                               liver size, identify ascites, and characterize hepatic disease.

                     148
 What is the most appropriate         Variceal bleeds are treated with inpatient intravenous resuscitation,
  treatment for this condition?        blood transfusion, esophagoscopy with or without banding, and
                                       prophylactic antibiotics for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
                                       Treatment for chronic liver disease includes sobriety, vitamin
                                       supplements, and a tailored diet. Salt and protein restriction minimizes
                                       ﬂuid retention and encephalopathy, respectively. However, once
                                       encephalopathy is controlled, a moderate protein diet will best fulﬁll
                                       the increased protein requirements of cirrhosis. Ascites is treated with
                                       diuretics or paracentesis, for those unresponsive to or intolerant of
                                       diuretics. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) can
                                       be used to treat variceal bleeding refractory to standard therapy or
                                       intractable ascites with preserved synthetic function; it is used as a
                                       bridge to transplantation. Notably, TIPS improves the symptoms of
                                       cirrhosis but not the mortality rate. Liver transplantation is primarily
                                       indicated in cases of decompensated cirrhosis or hepatocellular
                                       carcinoma.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Fifty percent of patients with severe cirrhosis survive 6 months. Patients
  with this condition?                 are also at risk for developing hepatocellular carcinoma, with rates of
                                       3–5% per year. Liver transplantation markedly improves prognosis.

                                                                                                                    GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                            149
                      CASE 14                     A 29-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for repeated episodes of
                                                   abdominal pain. She reports that, although she has had these episodes since college, the
                                                   pains have become signiﬁcantly worse since her divorce 1 year ago. Her abdominal pain
                                                   is usually focused around her umbilicus, and she describes it as “crampy.” She reports
                                                   that the episodes of pain are exacerbated by eating and are relieved only by a bowel
                                                   movement. She also frequently feels bloated. Her recent bowel movements have been
                                                   loose and watery, with intervening episodes of constipation. She adds that although
                                                   the abdominal pain is not present at night, she is also having difﬁculty sleeping. She
                                                   denies any fevers or weight loss. Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.0°C
                                                   (98.6°F), pulse of 69/min, and blood pressure of 118/76 mm Hg. An abdominal
                                                   examination is remarkable only for diffuse mild abdominal tenderness.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?        Irritable bowel syndrome. Irritable bowel syndrome is a disorder
                                                                 characterized by abdominal pain and changes in bowel habits in
                                                                 the absence of identiﬁable gastrointestinal structural abnormalities.
                                                                 Women are diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome two to three times
                                                                 more often than men. The majority of patients present prior to age 45.
                                                                 Of note, 50% of patients diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome have
                                                                 comorbid psychiatric disorders.

                      What are the signs and symptoms           By deﬁnition, all patients diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome
                       of this condition?                        experience abdominal pain or discomfort. The abdominal pain is
                                                                 highly variable in intensity and location but is usually diffuse and more

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                                 often in the mid-lower abdomen. It rarely awakens a patient from sleep.
                                                                 Pain is often exacerbated by eating or emotional stress and is relieved
                                                                 by passage of ﬂatus or stool. Patients may also experience constipation
                                                                 alternating with diarrhea, usually with one of these symptoms
                                                                 predominating. Stool may also be accompanied by passage of large
                                                                 amounts of mucus. Bleeding and malabsorption are not features of
                                                                 irritable bowel syndrome, and weight loss does not typically occur. If
                                                                 these symptoms exist, alternative diagnoses should be sought.
                      What tests and/or imaging                 Irritable bowel syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion based on the
                       tools could be used to conﬁrm             clinical presentation. Tests should be used to rule out other possible
                       diagnosis?                                diagnoses. These tests could include a complete blood count, thyroid-
                                                                 stimulating hormone, electrolytes, stool cultures, fecal occult blood,
                                                                 abdominal ﬁlms, and barium contrast studies to rule out structural
                                                                 abnormalities. No diagnostic markers exist for irritable bowel
                                                                 syndrome.
                      What is the most appropriate              Patients need reassurance from their physicians about the nature
                       treatment for this condition?             of their symptoms and may also beneﬁt from stress management
                                                                 education. They should be encouraged to eliminate any foods that
                                                                 produce or exacerbate their symptoms. High-ﬁber diets, bulking
                                                                 agents, and ﬁber supplements such as psyllium are frequent
                                                                 recommendations. Clinicians have found that antispasmodics,
                                                                 particularly anticholinergic drugs, may provide temporary relief from
                                                                 painful cramps related to intestinal spasm. Antidiarrheal agents like
                                                                 loperamide may be helpful in patients with diarrhea-predominant
                                                                 disease, and tegaserod, a serotonin receptor agonist, may provide relief
                                                                 in patients with signiﬁcant constipation, but there are some concerns
                                                                 about an increased risk of cardiovascular disease from this medication.
                                                                 Tricyclic antidepressants are often prescribed for both their mood-
                                                                 elevating effects and their physiologic actions.

                     150
 CASE 15                   A 33-year-old lawyer presents to his primary care physician with burning epigastric
                            pain that worsens when he is hungry and is relieved by food. He reports that the pain
                            awakens him at night. Over the past month he has gained 6.8 kg (15 lb). He has smoked
                            2 packs of cigarettes per day for the past 10 years. Due to work-related stress, he often
                            gets severe headaches for which he takes up to seven aspirin tablets per day. Aside
                            from epigastric tenderness on palpation, his physical exam is unremarkable. Vital signs
                            include a temperature of 37°C (98.6°F), pulse of 75/min, and blood pressure of 118/74
                            mm Hg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Peptic ulcer disease (PUD). PUD encompasses duodenal ulcer (DU)
                                          disease and gastric ulcer (GU) disease. PUD is twice as common in
                                          men as in women and occurs more frequently in smokers. Other
                                          risk factors include infection with Helicobacter pylori and use of
                                          nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or steroids. The
                                          gastric pain in DU is alleviated by food, while that associated with
                                          GU is typically exacerbated by food. Zollinger-Ellison (ZE), a
                                          gastrin-secreting tumor, often presents with PUD due to gastric acid
                                          hypersecretion. To rule out ZE, a secretin stimulation test and a gastrin
                                          level should be performed.

 What are the symptoms associated        Epigastric pain is the most common presenting symptom of PUD.
  with this condition?                    The pain is often characterized as a gnawing or burning sensation
                                          that occurs 2–3 hours after a meal. Patients often report being woken

                                                                                                                        GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                          up at night by the pain. Pain radiating to the back is concerning for
                                          a perforated ulcer. Other symptoms include nausea, vomiting, chest
                                          discomfort, melena, or hematochezia.
 How is this condition diagnosed?        Endoscopy is the gold standard for diagnosing PUD and for
                                          detecting infection with H. pylori. Alarming features that warrant
                                          endoscopy include the new onset of symptoms in patients > 50 years
                                          old, dysphagia, gross or occult GI bleeding, unexplained anemia,
                                          unintentional weight loss, anorexia, and signiﬁcant emesis. H. pylori
                                          serology (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) is the initial
                                          recommended screening test for infection in a case of new-onset
                                          dyspepsia. A urease breath test can differentiate active infection from
                                          residual antibodies, which persist for months after eradication of
                                          H. pylori.
 What are the complications              Complications of PUD include bleeding (20%), perforation (7%), and
  associated with this condition?         gastric outlet syndrome caused by scarring and edema.
 What is the most appropriate            Patients are encouraged to discontinue smoking and of use NSAIDs.
  treatment for this condition?           For patients infected with H. pylori, a triple regimen including a proton
                                          pump inhibitor (PPI), amoxicillin, and clarithromycin, is initiated. H2
                                          blockers and PPIs are mainstay treatments of PUD. Surgery is indicated
                                          only for ulcers refractory to
                                          12 weeks of medical treatment or in cases of perforation, obstruction,
                                          or hemorrhage.

                                                                                                                151
                      CASE 16                     A 29-year-old-man presents to his gastroenterologist with jaundice, fatigue, fever,
                                                   pruritus, and abdominal pain. He also notes pale-colored stools. His past medical history
                                                   is signiﬁcant for ulcerative colitis. He denies any fever, rashes, or recent illness but has
                                                   been feeling fatigued for the past 3 weeks. He has been in a monogamous relationship
                                                   with his wife for the past four year and has no history of sexually transmitted diseases. He
                                                   works at a fast-food chain and tested negative for hepatitis A, B, and C at the company’s
                                                   last annual screening. Physical exam is notable for splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and
                                                   upper right quadrant tenderness. The patient has no rashes. His lungs are clear, and his
                                                   heart has a regular rate and normal rhythm. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                   GGT: 80 U/L
                                                   Alkaline phosphatase: 300 U/L
                                                   Bilirubin: 7 mg/dl
                                                   Albumin: 1.0 g/dl
                                                   PT: 18 seconds
                                                   + p-ANCA
                                                   Magnetic resonance cholangiography shows multifocal stricturing and beading
                                                   involving both the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary tree. Abdominal ultrasound is
                                                   negative for stones.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?         Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). PSC is a chronic progressive
                                                                  disease characterized by inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis of medium- and

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                                  large-diameter intrahepatic and extrahepatic ducts of the biliary tree.
                                                                  The resulting stricture leads to biliary cirrhosis, portal hypertension,
                                                                  and liver failure. The cause of PSC is unknown, but it has a strong
                                                                  association with ulcerative colitis. Other diseases that can present
                                                                  similarly include ascending cholangitis and cholecystitis; these are
                                                                  unlikely given the lack of stones on ultrasound.

                      How do patients with this                  Patients commonly present with fatigue, pruritus, steatorrhea, and
                       condition typically present?               deﬁciencies of fat-soluble vitamins. Fatigue can be profound and
                                                                  pruritus may be debilitating. Up to 80% of patients with PSC have
                                                                  inﬂammatory bowel disease (most often ulcerative colitis [UC]).
                                                                  However, < 5% of patients with UC develop PSC.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools            Cholangiography is the gold standard for diagnosing PSC.
                       could be used to conﬁrm the                Characteristic ﬁndings are irregularly distributed areas of ﬁbrosis
                       diagnosis?                                 interrupted by areas of saccular dilatation, resulting in the
                                                                  characteristic beaded appearance. Ultrasound may also show ductal
                                                                  dilatation, splenomegaly, ascites, and increased heterogeneity and
                                                                  echogenicity of the liver due to cirrhosis.
                      What are the typical laboratory            Laboratory ﬁndings in PSC are consistent with a cholestatic liver
                       ﬁndings in this condition?                 enzyme picture. Abnormalities include an elevation in γ-glutamyl
                                                                  transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in addition to mild
                                                                  elevations in aminotransferases (ALT and AST). Once cirrhosis has
                                                                  developed, bilirubin will also be increased. In addition, perinuclear
                                                                  neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (P-ANCA) is positive in 70% of
                                                                  patients with PSC.
                      What is the most appropriate               Short-term palliative treatments include balloon dilatation and stent
                       treatment for this condition?              placement in the obstructed biliary tree. Liver transplantation is the
                                                                  only deﬁnitive cure.

                     152
 CASE 17                   A 63-year-old woman who was recently hospitalized 3 weeks for pyelonephritis is
                            brought to the emergency department by her daughter for new-onset diarrhea and
                            fever. The woman appears weak and dehydrated. The daughter reports that her mother
                            has been having continuous episodes of up to 6 loose watery stools for the past 3 days.
                            Her medical history is signiﬁcant for Parkinson’s disease and hypothyroidism, which is
                            well-controlled with levothyroxine. She is otherwise healthy. On physical exam, her
                            temperature is 38.3°C (101°F), pulse is 125/min, blood pressure is 80/40 mm Hg, and
                            respiratory rate is 22/min with 93% oxygen saturation on room air. On examination,
                            she is lethargic but arousable, her neck veins are ﬂat, and her lungs are clear to
                            auscultation. She is tachycardic, but no gallops, murmurs, or clicks are heard. Her
                            abdominal exam is notable for diffuse tenderness, guarding, and rebound tenderness.
                            Lab ﬁndings include WBC count of 18,000/mm3 and a positive fecal leukocyte test.

 What should be the ﬁrst course of       Assess vital signs, secure IV access, order saline, type and cross blood,
  action?                                 and call for help. The patient most likely has a perforated colon and
                                          will require surgical intervention.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Pseudomembranous colitis. Pseudomembranous colitis is a colonic
                                          infection caused by Clostridium difﬁcile, a spore-forming anaerobe
                                          normally found in the GI tract. Long-term treatment with antibiotics,
                                          especially clindamycin, leads to eradication of the normal gut ﬂora and
                                          allows C. difﬁcile to grow unimpeded. C. difﬁcile releases enterotoxins
                                          that damage the mucosa of the colon, resulting in a friable mixture of

                                                                                                                         GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                          inﬂammatory cells, ﬁbrin, and bacteria.
 What other symptoms are                 The classical presentation is cramping, diffuse abdominal pain, fever,
  common in patients with this            and watery (occasionally bloody), malodorous stool. Most patients will
  condition?                              give a history of antibiotic use and/or recent hospitalization.

 What are the complications              A life-threatening complication of pseudomembranous colitis is toxic
  associated with this condition?         megacolon. Toxic megacolon, which develops when the infection
                                          penetrates all layers of the colon wall, carries the risk of perforation.
 What tests and/or imaging tools         Assays for C. difﬁcile toxin (usually toxin A) are used to diagnose
  could be used to conﬁrm the             C. difﬁcile colitis. Cultures are not used since C. difﬁcile are among
  diagnosis?                              the normal colonic ﬂora. The presence of fecal leukocytes supports
                                          the diagnosis. In situations requiring rapid diagnosis or in patients
                                          with ileus, sigmoidoscopy can be performed. Yellowish membranous
                                          plaque visible on the colonic mucosa is pathognomonic for C. difﬁcile
                                          infection. Toxic megacolon is characterized radiographically by dilation
                                          of the transverse colon to a diameter > 6 cm and “thumbprinting”
                                          (bowel wall edema).
 What is the most appropriate            Stabilize the patient (i.e., ﬂuid resuscitation, blood transfusion, surgical
  treatment for this condition?           intervention), then stop the offending antibiotic and start the patient on
                                          oral metronidazole or vancomycin.

                                                                                                                 153
                      CASE 18                   A 47-year-old man presents to the emergency department with colicky abdominal
                                                 pain that has lasted 5 hours. He reports two episodes of feculent vomiting and a
                                                 bowel movement 10 hours ago. Physical examination reveals a temperature of
                                                 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse of 92/min, and blood pressure of 134/90 mm Hg. Abdominal
                                                 examination reveals a mildly distended abdomen with well-healed surgical scars and
                                                 diffuse tenderness. High-pitched, hyperactive bowel sounds are noted. No hernias are
                                                 appreciated, and rectal examination is unremarkable. An abdominal ﬁlm is shown in
                                                 Figure 6-4.

GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                 FIGURE 6-4.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Doherty GM, Way LW. Current Surgi-
                                                 cal Diagnosis and Treatment, 12th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006; Fig. 29-6.)

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?       Small bowel obstruction. Small bowel obstruction is deﬁned as the
                                                                blocked passage of bowel contents through the small bowel; the
                                                                obstruction can be complete or partial. Bowel strangulation from
                                                                vascular compromise may result in bowel ischemia or infarction. In
                                                                adults, the majority of small bowel obstructions arise from adhesions
                                                                from prior abdominal surgery (60% of cases), hernias (10–20%), or
                                                                neoplasm (10–20%). By contrast, the leading cause of small bowel
                                                                obstruction in children is hernias.

                      What are the signs and symptoms          Symptoms include colicky abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and
                       of this condition?                       obstipation. Continued passage of ﬂatus and/or stool 6–12 hours
                                                                after symptom onset is characteristic of partial rather than complete
                                                                obstruction. Bowel sounds are described as high-pitched tinkles
                                                                and peristaltic rushes. Fever, hypotension, rebound tenderness, and
                                                                tachycardia suggest a surgical emergency. The relative predominance
                                                                of vomiting and distention depends on the site of obstruction; higher
                                                                obstruction results in more vomiting and less distention.

                     154
 What tests and/or imaging tools   Abdominal ﬁlms (erect and supine; see Figure 6-4) show dilated small
  could be used to conﬁrm the       bowel loops, air-ﬂuid levels, and a paucity of colonic gas. CT of the
  diagnosis?                        abdomen may conﬁrm the diagnosis. Mild leukocytosis is common,
                                    particularly with strangulation of bowel.

 What is the most appropriate      Partial obstruction can be managed with supportive care, including
  treatment for this condition?     nasogastric suction, intravenous hydration, elimination of both solid
                                    and liquid oral intake, and electrolyte repletion. Surgery is required
                                    in cases of complete obstruction with vascular compromise or
                                    symptoms lasting > 3 days. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are commonly
                                    administered as prophylaxis against bacterial translocation across the
                                    bowel wall.

                                                                                                              GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                        155
                      CASE 19                    A 47-year-old man presents to the emergency department with mild abdominal pain
                                                  that he has had for the past 24 hours. He has noticed an increase in his abdominal
                                                  girth and has been feeling intermittently confused. He adds that last year another
                                                  physician told him that his “liver was bad.” Physical examination reveals a temperature
                                                  of 38.2°C (100.8°F), pulse of 104/min, and blood pressure of 136/74 mm Hg. He is
                                                  alert and oriented to person and place. He is unable to provide the correct date. An
                                                  abdominal examination reveals a distended, nontender abdomen with shifting dullness.
                                                  Neurological examination reveals asterixis.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?       Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP). Spontaneous bacterial
                                                                infection of ascitic ﬂuid is seen in patients with cirrhosis and is
                                                                likely caused by translocation of enteric bacteria across the gut wall
                                                                or by mesenteric lymphatics seeding the ascitic ﬂuid. Twenty to
                                                                thirty percent of cirrhotic patients with ascites develop spontaneous
                                                                peritonitis. However, the incidence is > 40% in patients with ascitic
                                                                ﬂuid total protein < 1 g/dL, due to decreased bacterial opsonization
                                                                and phagocytosis.

                      What is the etiology of this             Nearly all cases of SBP are caused by a single pathogen. Common
                       condition?                               causative pathogens include enteric gram-negative bacteria
                                                                (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterococcus species) or gram-
                                                                positive bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae, viridans streptococci).
                                                                Anaerobic bacteria are not associated with SBP. Multiple pathogens

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                                should raise the possibility of secondary bacterial peritonitis, a surgical
                                                                emergency.
                      What signs and symptoms are              Eighty to 90% of patients with SBP are symptomatic, but symptoms are
                       associated with this condition?          typically mild and nonspeciﬁc. Worsening encephalopathy is the most
                                                                common presenting symptom and may be accompanied by worsening
                                                                ascites, fever, and abdominal pain secondary to abdominal distention.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools          All patients suspected of having SBP should undergo abdominal
                       could be used to conﬁrm the              paracentesis. Ascitic ﬂuid should be sent for cell count, and blood
                       diagnosis?                               culture bottles should be inoculated at the bedside. Ascitic ﬂuid with
                                                                a count of > 250 neutrophils/mL is presumptive evidence of SBP.
                                                                Patients with < 1 g/dL of protein in their ascitic ﬂuid are at high risk of
                                                                developing SBP.
                      What is the most appropriate             Patients with ascitic ﬂuid consistent with SBP are presumed to be
                       treatment for this condition?            infected and should be started on intravenous antibiotics, regardless of
                                                                symptoms. Cefotaxime is the antibiotic of choice, but ceftriaxone or
                                                                a quinolone and metronidazole are good alternatives. Supplemental
                                                                administration of intravenous albumin may reduce mortality by
                                                                decreasing the incidence of hepatorenal syndrome. Response to therapy
                                                                can be documented by a 50% decrease in the polymorphonuclear
                                                                neutrophil count on repeat paracentesis 48 hours after the initiation of
                                                                therapy.
                      What is the prognosis for patients       The mortality rate of SBP is up to 30% during hospitalization and up
                       with this condition?                     to 70% by 1 year due to progressive liver disease. Patients who develop
                                                                SBP should be maintained on long-term antibiotic prophylaxis (e.g.,
                                                                weekly norﬂoxacin) and evaluated for liver transplantation. The
                                                                patient’s ascites should also be optimally controlled.

                     156
 CASE 20                   A 50-year-old surgeon presents to his primary care physician with a 2–3-week history
                            of fatigue and right upper quadrant discomfort. During the past week, he has
                            noticed yellowing of his eyes. He was previously healthy and has no chronic medical
                            problems. Several months ago, while supervising a new intern on a trauma case he
                            was accidentally stuck with a needle. He did not seek medical care at that time due to
                            the patient’s critical condition but thinks that the patient may have been a drug user.
                            His physical exam is notable for jaundice, hepatomegaly, and right upper quadrant
                            tenderness. His labs include:
                            Bilirubin: 8.9 mg/dl
                            AST: 1398 U/L
                            ALT: 2200 U/L
                            Alkaline phosphatase: 290 U/L
                            INR: 1.2
                            HbsAg, HBeAg, HBV DNA: positive
                            Anti-HBs, anti-HBe: negative

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Viral hepatitis. Acute viral hepatitis presents with transaminase levels in
                                           the 100–5000 range; higher transaminase levels are typically associated
                                           with acute toxic injury. Etiologies of viral hepatitis include hepatitis
                                           A, B, C, D, and E viruses; Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus
                                           (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), and coxsackievirus.

                                                                                                                         GASTROI NTESTI NAL
 What are the signs and symptoms          The prodromal symptoms of viral hepatitis are systemic and variable.
  associated with this condition?          Constitutional signs include nausea and vomiting, fatigue, malaise, and
                                           low grade fever. During acute infection, the liver becomes enlarged
                                           and tender and may be associated with right upper quadrant pain and
                                           discomfort. In rare cases, patients can present with a cholestatic picture
                                           (elevations predominantly in alkaline phosphatase). Patients with acute
                                           Hepatitis C are usually asymptomatic for years.
 What laboratory tests could be           Disease is diagnosed with serological tests (see Tables 6-2 and 6-3).
  used to conﬁrm the diagnosis?

                                                                                                                   157
                     TA B L E 6 - 2 .   Clinical and Laboratory Features of Viral Hepatitis

                        FEATURE               HAV                   HBV                       HCV                HDV                    HEV

                        Incubation            15–45                 30–180                    15–160             30–180                 14–60
                        (days)

                        Onset                 Acute                 Insidious or acute        Insidious          Insidious or acute     Acute

                        Transmission           Fecal-oral           IV drug use, needle       IV drug use,       IV drug use, needle    Fecal-oral
                                                                    stick, maternal-          needle stick       stick
                                                                    fetal transmission,
                                                                    sexually transmitted

                        Clinical severity     Mild                  Occasionally severe       Moderate           Occasionally severe    Mild

                        Serology              Diagnosis: IgM        Acute diagnosis:          Acute and          Diagnosis: anti-HDV,   Diagnosis: IgM/
                                              anti-HAV               HBsAg, IgM               chronic             HDV RNA               IgG anti-HEV
                                              Previous infection:    anti-HBc                 infection: anti-    HBV/HDV               (assays being
                                              IgG anti-HAV          Chronic diagnosis:        HCV, HCV RNA        coinfection: IgM      developed);
                                                                     IgG anti-HBc,            (PCR)               anti-HBc and          virus in stool
                                                                     HBsAg                                        anti-HDV
                                                                    Markers of                                   HDV superinfection:

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                                     replication: HBeAg,                          IgG anti-HBc and
                                                                     HBV DNA                                      anti-HDV

                        Progression to        None                  Occasional (1–10%)        Common (85%)       Common                 None
                        chronicity                                  (90% of neonates)

                         Cancer               None                  +                         +                  ±                      None

                         Prognosis            Excellent             Worse with age,           Moderate           Acute, good            Good, except
                                                                    debility                                     Chronic, poor          in pregnant
                                                                                                                                        women

                        Prophylaxis           IG                    HBIG                      None               HBV vaccine (none      Vaccine
                                              Inactivated           Recombinant                                  for HBV carriers)
                                              vaccine               vaccine

                        Therapy               None                  Pegylated interferon,     Pegylated          Interferon ±           None
                                                                    Lamivudine,               interferon plus
                                                                    Adefovir                  ribavirin

                     Modiﬁed, with permission, from Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, Loscalzo J (Eds.), Harrison’s
                     Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008: Table 298-2.

                     158
TA B L E 6 - 3 .   Common Serologic Patterns in Hepatitis B

   DIAGNOSIS                          HBSAG     ANTI-HBS      ANTI-HBC      HBEAG       ANTI-HBE

   Acute hepatitis B                    +           –            IgM           +            –

   Infectious chronic Hepatitis B       +           –            IgG           +            –

   Noninfectious chronic                +           –            IgG           –            +
   Hepatitis B (low viral load)

   Vaccination (immunity)               –           +             –            –            –

Modiﬁed, with permission, from Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL,
Loscalzo J (Eds.), Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008:
Table 298-3.

                                                                                                             GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                       159
                      CASE 21                   A 19-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for recent changes in
                                                 her mood. Over the past 6 months she has felt increasingly depressed and anxious.
                                                 She believes that her symptoms have affected her extracurricular activities, as she
                                                 feels uncoordinated on the soccer ﬁeld. Physical examination reveals a temperature
                                                 of 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse of 74/min, and blood pressure of 118/82 mm Hg. An
                                                 abdominal examination reveals hepatomegaly without signs of jaundice. Neurological
                                                 examination shows a subtle resting tremor and increased tonicity. An ophthalmologic
                                                 examination is signiﬁcant for green-brown deposits in the cornea bilaterally.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?     Wilson’s disease. Wilson’s disease, or hepatolenticular degeneration,
                                                              is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a defect in copper
                                                              transportation, resulting in excessive deposition of copper in the liver,
                                                              brain, and other tissues. The prevalence of the disease is approximately
                                                              1 in 30,000, with most patients presenting between the ages of 5 and
                                                              40. Clinical manifestations are caused by copper toxicity and include
                                                              a multitude of signs and symptoms related to hepatic, neurologic,
                                                              hematologic, and renal impairment.

                      What is the pathogenesis of this       Wilson’s disease is caused by excessive absorption of copper in the
                       condition?                             small intestine and decreased copper excretion by the liver. In early
                                                              stages of the disease, the excess copper is stored in the liver. As the
                                                              disease progresses, the excess copper damages the hepatocytes and
                                                              eventually leaks into the circulation and deposits in the brain, eyes, and

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                                                              other organs.
                      What are the signs and symptoms        The clinical presentation of Wilson’s disease is variable. Approximately
                       associated with this condition?        40% of patients present with signs and symptoms of chronic
                                                              hepatocellular disease, either chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis. Others
                                                              may present with asymptomatic liver function abnormalities. Patients
                                                              whose disease progresses beyond hepatic dysfunction may present with
                                                              neuropsychiatric symptoms such as tremors, rigidity, clumsiness of
                                                              gait, slurring of speech, uncontrollable grinning (risus sardonicus), and
                                                              drooling. Patients may also present with acute or fulminant liver failure
                                                              complicated by hemolytic anemia and renal failure. Wilson’s disease is
                                                              classically associated with Kayser-Fleischer rings, green-brown deposits
                                                              of copper in Descemet’s membrane, one of the deeper layers of the
                                                              cornea.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools        Serum aminotransferases are moderately elevated in patients with
                       could be used to conﬁrm the            Wilson’s disease. The aspartate aminotransferase concentration most
                       diagnosis?                             commonly exceeds that of alanine aminotransferase because of low-
                                                              grade hemolysis. Serum ceruloplasmin levels are classically diminished;
                                                              however, this does not establish or exclude the diagnosis. Patients with
                                                              Wilson’s disease also typically have increased urinary copper excretion.
                                                              Slit-lamp examination for Kayser-Fleischer rings or liver biopsy with
                                                              stains for copper and quantitative copper determination conﬁrm the
                                                              diagnosis. A rising bilirubin and a falling alkaline phosphatase should
                                                              raise the suspicion for Wilson’s disease in patients with fulminant liver
                                                              disease.

                     160
 What is the most appropriate    Copper removal is achieved by the administration of D-penicillamine,
  treatment for this condition?   a potent copper chelator. Copper reaccumulation is prevented with
                                  lower doses of chelators or oral zinc. Patients should restrict their
                                  dietary copper intake by avoiding copper-rich foods like liver, shellﬁsh,
                                  and legumes. Anticopper therapy must be lifelong. Although resolution
                                  of symptoms may be incomplete, with treatment, liver function
                                  may partially recover within a year, and neurologic and psychiatric
                                  symptoms may improve between 6 and 24 months.

                                                                                                              GASTROI NTESTI NAL

                                                                                                      161
                      CASE 22                   A 40-year-old man presents to his primary care physician for recurrent abdominal pain.
                                                 He reports that, despite strict adherence to his peptic ulcer disease medication regimen,
                                                 he has frequent episodes of burning abdominal pain. He also reports diarrhea and an
                                                 unintentional weight loss of 4.5 kg (10 lb) over the past 6 months. He adds that he is
                                                 very concerned about his symptoms because of a strong family history of tumors. His
                                                 brother was recently diagnosed with a pituitary tumor, and his father had “some sort
                                                 of tumor in his pancreas” at age 46. Physical examination reveals a temperature of
                                                 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse of 83/min, and blood pressure of 130/70 mm Hg. His physical
                                                 examination is otherwise unremarkable.

                      What is the most likely diagnosis?      Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is caused by
                                                               gastrin-secreting neuroendocrine tumors (gastrinomas), which result in
                                                               hypergastrinemia and acid hypersecretion. The incidence of Zollinger-
                                                               Ellison syndrome varies from 0.1–1% in individuals presenting with peptic
                                                               ulcer disease. Males are more commonly affected than females, with most
                                                               patients diagnosed between ages 30 and 50. Primary gastrinomas arise in
                                                               the pancreas (25%), duodenal wall (45%), or lymph nodes (5–15%). One-
                                                               third of gastrinomas have already metastasized to the liver at the initial
                                                               presentation and > two-thirds are malignant. Twenty-ﬁve to ﬁfty percent
                                                               of gastrinomas are associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
                                                               (MEN1) syndrome.

                      What are the signs and symptoms         Over 90% of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome develop peptic

GASTROI NTESTI NAL
                       associated with this condition?         ulcers. Gastrinoma should be suspected in patients with ulcers in
                                                               unusual locations (second part of the duodenum and beyond), ulcers
                                                               refractory to medical therapy, ulcer recurrence after acid-reducing
                                                               surgery, ulcers presenting with frank complications, or ulcers in the
                                                               absence of Helicobacter pylori or NSAID ingestion. Other symptoms of
                                                               Zollinger-Ellison syndrome include recurrent abdominal pain, nausea,
                                                               vomiting, GERD, diarrhea, steatorrhea, and weight loss. In most cases,
                                                               the symptoms of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome are indistinguishable from
                                                               other causes of peptic ulcer disease and therefore may go undiagnosed.
                      What tests and/or imaging tools         A fasting serum gastrin concentration > 150 pg/mL is the most sensitive
                       could be used to conﬁrm the             and speciﬁc method of diagnosing Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
                       diagnosis?                              Patients should be instructed to stop taking H2-receptor antagonists
                                                               for 24 hours or proton pump inhibitors for 6 days prior to obtaining a
                                                               fasting gastrin concentration. A secretin stimulation test should also
                                                               be performed to distinguish Zollinger-Ellison syndrome from other
                                                               causes of hypergastrinemia. MEN1 syndrome should be excluded in
                                                               all patients by obtaining serum parathyroid hormone (PTH), prolactin,
                                                               luteinizing hormone–follicle-stimulating hormone (LH-FSH), and
                                                               growth hormone (GH) levels. Multiple imaging modalities are often
                                                               required to identify the location of the gastrinoma and can include CT,
                                                               MRI, octreotide scanning, and endoscopic ultrasound.
                      What is the most appropriate            Zollinger-Ellison syndrome can be cured by surgical resection in up to
                       treatment for this condition?           30% of patients. However, cure can be achieved only if the gastrinoma
                                                               is resected before metastatic spread has occurred. Regardless of
                                                               resectability, high-dose proton pump inhibitors are the treatment of
                                                               choice and are recommended to decrease acid production and provide
                                                               symptomatic relief.
                      What is the prognosis for patients      The 15-year survival of patients without liver metastases at initial
                       with this condition?                    presentation is > 95%. Thirty percent of patients with hepatic
                                                               metastases have a survival of 10 years.

                     162
Hematology/Oncology

Case 1            164

Case 2            166

Case 3            167

Case 4            168

Case 5            170

Case 6            171

Case 7            172

Case 8            174

Case 9            175

Case 10           176

Case 11           178

Case 12           180

Case 13           182

Case 14           183

Case 15           184

Case 16           186

Case 17           188

Case 18           190

Case 19           191

Case 20           192

Case 21           193

Case 22           194

                        163
                         CASE 1                    A 57-year-old man is referred to a hematologist for a detailed workup of severe anemia.
                                                    His hemoglobin level is 8.2 mg/dL, but testing reveals no evidence of occult bleeding.
                                                    For the past several weeks, he has noticed blood on his toothbrush nearly every day and
                                                    complains that he bruises more easily than before. He has become increasingly fatigued
                                                    and has cut back on his hours at the waste management company he owns because
                                                    he often becomes short of breath with mild exertion. In addition, he complains that
                                                    “I always have a cold; I can’t get rid of it.” In addition to the low hemoglobin, relevant
                                                    laboratory results include a WBC count of 3200/mm3, reticulocyte count of 0.8%, and
                                                    platelet count of 30,000/mm3. His peripheral smear shows myeloblasts and markedly
                                                    decreased granulocytes.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). While often idiopathic, AML
                                                                   may be caused by radiation therapy, chemical exposure such as
                                                                   excessive benzene exposure, and alkylating chemotherapeutic agents.
                                                                   AML is a clonal malignancy. It may present de novo or arise out of
                                                                   myelodysplasia or another hematologic malignancy. It is characterized
                                                                   by an increase in blast cells in the bone marrow (> 20%), as well as
                                                                   impaired production of normal RBCs, platelets, and neutrophils.
                                                                   Patients often present with pallor, fatigue, weakness, palpitations,
                                                                   dyspnea on exertion, and other symptoms of anemia. They may also
                                                                   have gingival bleeding, easy bruising, and conjunctival hemorrhages,

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                   which indicate thrombocytopenia. In addition, minor infections of
                                                                   the skin are common. Major infections (pneumonia, meningitis,
                                                                   etc.) are less likely because severe neutropenia may not occur until
                                                                   chemotherapy is instituted.

                         What is the pathogenesis of this         AML is associated with characteristic somatic mutations or
                          condition?                               translocations in hematopoietic stem cells. These mutant progenitors
                                                                   do not produce normal red cells, granulocytes, or platelets and have a
                                                                   survival and proliferative advantage over normal cells. Since the growth
                                                                   of normal cell lines is suppressed relative to the mutant cells, patients
                                                                   develop anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia.
                         What tests could be used to              A CBC and bone marrow biopsy both aid in the diagnosis of AML.
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    Patients are typically anemic due to their inability to produce normal
                                                                   RBCs, as reﬂected by reticulocyte counts in the range of 0.5–2.0%.
                                                                   The platelet count will be low, often < 50,000/μL. The WBC count
                                                                   will generally be < 5000/mm3, while the total neutrophil count will
                                                                   be < 1000/mm3. On a peripheral smear (see Figure 7-1), the major
                                                                   abnormality is seen in the white cells. Some patients will have Auer
                                                                   rods (elliptical cytoplasmic inclusions; Figure 7-2) in their blast cells,
                                                                   although this is more common in acute promyelocytic leukemia. A
                                                                   bone marrow biopsy will contain > 20% blast cells.
                         What is the most appropriate             The goal of treatment is to induce remission. Induction therapy
                          treatment for this condition?            typically combines an anthracycline antibiotic with cytarabine.
                                                                   Complications include hyperleukocytosis and pancytopenia. Red
                                                                   cell transfusions are needed to maintain the hematocrit during
                                                                   treatment. In order to induce sustained remission, either consolidation
                                                                   chemotherapy or allogenic bone marrow transplantation is necessary.

                        164
FIGURE 7-1.        Peripheral blood smear shows few             FIGURE 7-2.       Leukemic myeloblasts with an Auer rod.
platelets and myeloblasts with what appears to be ba-           Note two to four large, prominent nucleoli in each cell.
sophilic and eosinophilic metamyelocytes. (Reproduced,          (Reproduced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler
with permission, from the Pathology Education Instruc-          E, Kipps TJ, Seligsohn U, Kaushansky K, Prchal JT. Wil-
tional Resource Digital Library [http://peir.net] at the Uni-   liams Hematology, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006:
versity of Alabama, Birmingham.)                                Color Plate XVI-2.)

                                                                                                                             H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY

                                                                                                                       165
                         CASE 2                     A 4-year-old girl presents to her pediatrician with a 2-week history of cough, nasal
                                                     congestion, and fatigue. Her mother has brought her in three times in the past month
                                                     for unremitting cold symptoms; each time, the child has been diagnosed with a viral
                                                     upper respiratory infection and advised on symptomatic care. She has been sleeping
                                                     more than usual for the past few days, and she awoke this morning with a new rash. On
                                                     physical examination, she has a temperature of 37.2° C (99.0° F) and pulse of 140/min.
                                                     She appears pale, with scattered petechiae across her lower legs, hepatosplenomegaly,
                                                     and cervical lymphadenopathy.

                         How should the workup proceed            This child presents with symptoms suggesting multiple cytopenias;
                          for this patient’s condition?            therefore, the ﬁrst test should be a complete blood count (CBC)
                                                                   with peripheral blood smear. In this patient, the CBC will show
                                                                   neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia with lymphoblasts on
                                                                   peripheral smear.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). ALL is the most common
                                                                   malignancy of childhood. While suggested by the presence of
                                                                   lymphoblasts on peripheral smear, a diagnosis of ALL must be
                                                                   conﬁrmed by bone marrow aspirate and/or biopsy showing > 25%
                                                                   lymphoblasts.
                         What conditions should be                 Chronic viral infection (Epstein-Barr virus [EBV], cytomegalovirus

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                          included in the differential               [CMV]).
                          diagnosis?                                Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).
                                                                    Aplastic anemia.
                                                                    Autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
                                                                    Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

                         What are the stages of treatment,        Induction is the ﬁrst month of therapy and commonly involves oral
                          and what chemotherapies are              prednisone or dexamethasone, intramuscular asparaginase, intravenous
                          commonly used?                           vincristine, and intrathecal methotrexate; over 95% of patients have
                                                                   minimal residual disease on repeat bone marrow examination after
                                                                   this stage. Consolidation involves continued systemic therapy with
                                                                   intrathecal and cranial radiation therapy to eradicate CNS “sanctuaries”
                                                                   of disease. A brief intensiﬁcation of therapy following consolidation
                                                                   has been shown to improve survival in pediatric patients. Finally,
                                                                   maintenance chemotherapy is continued for several years to ensure
                                                                   remission. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may be used to treat
                                                                   relapsed patients.
                         What patient or disease                   Patient age >10 years.
                          characteristics indicate a negative       WBC count at diagnosis >50,000/mm3.
                          prognosis?                                CNS or testicular involvement.
                                                                    Residual disease following induction therapy.
                                                                    Chromosomal translocations t(9;22) or t(4;11).

                         The patient begins induction             Tumor lysis syndrome typically occurs early in the treatment of patients
                          chemotherapy but develops acute          with a high tumor burden due to the lysis of tumor cells. Laboratory
                          renal failure with a uric acid           hallmarks include hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia,
                          level of 16 mg/dL. What is the           and hyperuricemia. Aggressive hydration, alkalinization of urine, and
                          problem, and what is the most            administration of allopurinol (which inhibits uric acid production) are
                          appropriate treatment?                   important components of treatment. Hemodialysis may be necessary if
                                                                   renal failure is severe.

                        166
 CASE 3                      A 67-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with one episode of syncope,
                              fatigue, and weight loss for several months. He fainted earlier that morning and
                              felt palpitations prior to passing out. He also complains of alternating constipation
                              and diarrhea, tingling in his right hand, and difﬁculty forming words. On physical
                              examination, his vital signs include a temperature of 37.2° C (99.0°F) and respiratory
                              rate of 12/min. His seated blood pressure is 110/75 mm Hg with pulse of 75/min; after
                              standing, blood pressure is 95/60 mm Hg with pulse of 104/min. Hepatomegaly, 1+
                              peripheral edema, and macroglossia are noted. An electrocardiogram demonstrates
                              multiple premature ventricular contractions. Urinalysis reveals proteinuria, and urine
                              protein electrophoresis reveals monoclonal kappa light chains.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Systemic amyloidosis. This collection of diseases involves the
                                            extracellular deposition of ﬁbrillar proteins in multiple organ systems.
                                            They are classiﬁed by the type of protein in the deposit; there are
                                            24 known proteins, but the most common types are light-chain
                                            amyloidosis (AL), transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR), and amyloidosis A
                                            (AA). Macroglossia is typically a feature of AL.

 What tests and/or procedures              Conﬁrmation of amyloidosis requires tissue biopsy; fat aspiration or
  could be used to conﬁrm the               rectal biopsy is usually performed. Tissues are stained with Congo
  diagnosis?                                red and examined under polarized light. Amyloid proteins exhibit a
                                            characteristic apple-green birefringence.

                                                                                                                         H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
 What are the characteristics of the       Immunohistochemistry of a biopsy sample is the gold standard for
  different types of this disease?          identifying the type of amyloidosis. AL is associated with monoclonal
                                            plasma cell disorders, in which excess production of light-chain
                                            immunoglobulin leads to ﬁbrillar deposition in tissues. A clonal
                                            spike of immunoglobulin can be seen on electrophoresis of urine or
                                            serum; bone marrow examination can also demonstrate plasma cell
                                            proliferation. In ATTR, the transthyretin protein forms the amyloid
                                            deposits; there are senile and familial forms. AA is seen in patients with
                                            chronic inﬂammatory diseases, which can be infectious, autoimmune,
                                            neoplastic, or inherited. Serum amyloid A (SAA) is an acute-phase
                                            reactant; only certain alleles encode for the amyloidogenic form of
                                            SAA.
 What is the most appropriate              Given the resemblance of AL to myeloma, chemotherapy is the ﬁrst-
  treatment for this condition?             line treatment. Regimens typically include melphalan and prednisone.
                                            A doxorubicin analog, 4′-iodo-4′-deoxydoxorubicin (IDOX), has
                                            shown potential in breaking down existing amyloid ﬁbrils. Supportive
                                            therapy, including hemodialysis for renal failure and diuretics and
                                            antiarrhythmics for heart failure, may also be indicated depending on
                                            the degree of organ dysfunction.

                                                                                                                   167
                         CASE 4                    A 60-year-old white man presents to his family physician for a full physical examination.
                                                    His last doctor’s visit was 2 years ago when he had the ﬂu. He explains that his health
                                                    has been “relatively okay” and that he has had many colds but no ongoing medical
                                                    problems. Upon further probing, he admits that he has been increasingly tired for the
                                                    past 6 months and that he has lost about 9 kg (20 lb) over the past 2 years. He insists
                                                    that he is healthy and needed to lose the weight, but he denies any exercise regimen
                                                    or speciﬁc dietary restrictions. His vital signs are within normal limits, and he appears
                                                    comfortable. Upon examination, he has palpable lymph nodes in his neck and axillae.
                                                    He denies any pain on palpation; the nodes range from 1.0 cm to 3.0 cm in diameter.
                                                    His abdominal examination is signiﬁcant for hepatosplenomegaly. His chemistry test
                                                    values are within normal limits; his WBC count is 25,200/mm3 with 90% lymphocytes.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). CLL is a B-cell malignancy
                                                                   that occurs in older patients; the median age at presentation is 65
                                                                   years. The proliferating B cells cannot effectively recognize antigen,
                                                                   so patients are often immunocompromised and may have coexistent
                                                                   hypogammaglobulinemia. Some patients present with fatigue or
                                                                   lymphadenopathy, while the majority are asymptomatic. Eventually,
                                                                   some patients will develop hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. The disease
                                                                   progresses very slowly in most cases; rarely, patients will develop an
                                                                   aggressive large cell lymphoma (Richter’s syndrome). Staging for the

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                   nonzero stages of CLL (more than just lymphocytosis) follows the Rai
                                                                   system, which can be remembered using the mnemonic LOATh:
                                                                   I—Lymphocytosis + Lymphadenopathy
                                                                   II—Organomegaly (splenomegaly or hepatomegaly)
                                                                   III—Anemia
                                                                   IV—Thrombocytopenia

                         What is the pathogenesis of this         CLL is a monoclonal proliferation of mature lymphocytes. Despite
                          condition?                               their morphological maturity, these B cells are unable to produce
                                                                   functional antibodies. This renders patients more susceptible to
                                                                   infection, but patients may be asymptomatic for prolonged periods,
                                                                   given the slow progression of the disease.
                         What tests could be used to              A CBC and peripheral blood smear demonstrating isolated
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    lymphocytosis are virtually diagnostic for CLL. The WBC count
                                                                   will usually be > 20,000/mm3, with a total lymphocyte number
                                                                   of > 6,000/mm3. The cells will be small, mature, and structurally
                                                                   indistinguishable from immunocompetent lymphocytes (Figure 7-3).
                                                                   They express both the CD19 surface marker commonly found on
                                                                   B cells, as well as the CD5 marker usually attributed to T cells; this
                                                                   ﬁnding in combination with the lymphocytosis is diagnostic for CLL.
                                                                   Cyclin D should be evaluated to rule out mantle cell lymphoma, a
                                                                   common mimic.

                        168
 What is the most appropriate         In the case of indolent CLL, no treatment is required. If patients are
  treatment for this condition?        symptomatic—fatigued, anemic, thrombocytopenic, or presenting with
                                       lymphadenopathy—chemotherapy, often with purine analog-based
                                       therapy (i.e., ﬂudarabine) is warranted. If patients have autoimmune
                                       hemolytic anemia, they should receive prednisone or a splenectomy;
                                       ﬂudarabine may exacerbate warm autoimmune hemolysis. In patients
                                       with severe, refractory disease, allogenic bone marrow transplantation
                                       or antibody (anti-CD52) may be beneﬁcial; however, the role of
                                       allogenic transplantation is limited by the fact that the average patient
                                       is over the age of 60.
 What is the prognosis for patients   The median survival for CLL patients depends on the stage of disease
  with this condition?                 at diagnosis. Patients with stage 0 or stage I disease have a median
                                       survival of 10–15 years and may live a normal life for many years.
                                       Patients with stage III or stage IV disease have a median survival
                                       of at least 2 years; this will hopefully improve as new therapies are
                                       developed. Newer cellular markers, such as the presence of somatic
                                       mutations in the immunoglobulin domains, ZAP-70, cytogenetics, and
                                       CD38 may allow identiﬁcation of different prognostic categories for
                                       this disease.

                                                                                                                   H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY

                                       FIGURE 7-3.      Peripheral blood smear showing an excess number of ma-
                                       ture lymphocytes. (Reproduced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler
                                       E, Kipps TJ, Seligsohn U, Kaushansky K, Prchal JT. Williams Hematology,
                                       7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Color Plate XX-4.)

                                                                                                            169
                         CASE 5                    A 21-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with pain and swelling of
                                                    her right lower leg. The pain began the night before following a 12-hour plane ﬂight
                                                    and did not improve with resting overnight. She denies fevers or trauma to the leg. Her
                                                    only medication is an oral contraceptive. When questioned, she notes that multiple
                                                    family members have suffered similar symptoms and that her maternal grandmother
                                                    died from a pulmonary embolism. On physical examination, she is afebrile with normal
                                                    vital signs. Her lateral right lower leg is erythematous without a palpable cord, and she
                                                    reports increased pain with passive dorsiﬂexion of the right foot.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Deep venous thrombosis due to a hypercoagulable state, likely
                                                                   factor V Leiden mutation. This is the most common of the genetic
                                                                   hypercoagulable states. While less severe than mutations in protein
                                                                   C or protein S, patients with factor V Leiden frequently develop
                                                                   superﬁcial and deep vein thromboses, especially in the presence of
                                                                   other risk factors (smoking, oral contraceptives, immobilization).

                         What is the pathogenesis of this         Patients with factor V Leiden are resistant to activated protein C
                          condition?                               (APC), an anticoagulant that deactivates factor Va in the clotting
                                                                   cascade. The mutation results in an Arg506Gln substitution in factor
                                                                   Va, which renders it much less susceptible to deactivation by APC.
                                                                   Although APC can act at a second site in factor Va, degradation occurs
                                                                   more slowly than at Arg506. The second deactivation site explains the

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                   partial resistance to APC and the relatively mild clinical phenotype of
                                                                   factor V Leiden compared to other hereditary prothrombotic states.
                         What tests could be used to              Coagulation studies are performed as a screening test on both patient
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    and control plasma. The addition of APC will result in a prolonged
                                                                   activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) in the control plasma, but
                                                                   less prolongation in the patient plasma. Repeating this test using factor
                                                                   V–deﬁcient plasma allows the physician to test for lupus anticoagulant
                                                                   and other prothrombotic disorders. The diagnosis is conﬁrmed by DNA
                                                                   testing using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to isolate the speciﬁc
                                                                   mutation; this will also determine heterozygosity versus homozygosity
                                                                   for the mutation.
                         What is the most appropriate             A standard heparin and warfarin regimen should be initiated in any
                          treatment for this condition?            patient with known venous thromboembolism. Thrombophilic patients
                                                                   should receive prophylactic doses of low-molecular-weight heparin
                                                                   prior to surgery or air travel lasting > 4 hours, during pregnancy until
                                                                   6 weeks after delivery, or for long periods of immobilization.
                         The patient mentions that she            Hereditary thrombophilias have been associated with many
                          is hoping to become pregnant             complications of pregnancy, including venous thromboembolism,
                          within the next few years.               stillbirth, placental abruption, and severe preeclampsia. Women with
                          How does this condition affect           factor V Leiden heterozygosity have a signiﬁcantly increased incidence
                          pregnancy?                               of recurrent fetal loss.

                        170
 CASE 6                    A 6-year-old girl is brought to the pediatrician by her parents 1 week after her adoption.
                            She has had a progressively severe cold for the past week and developed a cough
                            productive of yellow sputum yesterday. She was seen at the community clinic 3 days
                            ago (when she had a fever of 37.7° C [99.8° F]) and was given antibiotics. Today, her
                            fever is 39.4° C (102.9° F). She is tachycardic at 125/min, respiratory rate is
                            16/min, and blood pressure is 100/58 mm Hg. She is curled up on the examination
                            table and appears pale and lethargic. During his examination, the pediatrician notes
                            that the patient’s thumbs are proportionately smaller than her other ﬁngers and that she
                            has a number of hyperpigmented lesions on her skin that are 4–8 cm in diameter. He
                            suspects that the patient has an inherited disorder.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Fanconi’s anemia (FA). This is an autosomal recessive disorder
                                           characterized by defective DNA repair due to a variety of mutations.
                                           Thrombocytopenia and pancytopenia are common presentations of
                                           the disease, so care must be taken to distinguish FA from other causes
                                           of decreased platelets, such as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
                                           (ITP), and pancytopenic conditions, including aplastic anemia or
                                           acute leukemias. Patients with FA have varying degrees of hematologic
                                           abnormalities, including purpura, petechiae or bleeding, and weakness
                                           or fatigue. In addition, some may have congenital abnormalities such
                                           as unusual skin pigmentation (e.g., café-au-lait spots), short stature,

                                                                                                                         H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                           missing or malformed thumbs and radii, horseshoe kidneys, and
                                           microcephaly.

 What is the pathogenesis of this         There are at least 11 known genes associated with Fanconi’s anemia.
  condition?                               The proteins produced from these genes form a complex that
                                           ubiquinates the D2 protein thought to be involved in the response to
                                           DNA damage. Failure to effectively inactivate D2 is hypothesized to
                                           result in FA.
 What tests can be used to conﬁrm         A CBC can reveal many properties that are helpful in diagnosing FA.
  the diagnosis?                           Patients will typically present with a low platelet count and leukopenia.
                                           Cells will be macrocytic and anisocytic, and fetal hemoglobin will
                                           be elevated. In addition, bone marrow will be hypoplastic or aplastic.
                                           Because this is a disorder of DNA repair, induction of chromosome
                                           breaks and rearrangements using diepoxybutane can conﬁrm the
                                           diagnosis. This bone marrow or skin test is highly sensitive, even
                                           in children who are not yet symptomatic. Other disorders such
                                           as Diamond-Blackfan anemia, aplastic anemia, and dyskeratosis
                                           congenita should also be considered in the differential diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate             Patients with Fanconi’s anemia are at greater risk of infection and
  treatment for this condition?            bleeding, especially during adolescence and early adulthood.
                                           Neutropenic patients must be treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics.
                                           Transfusions should be considered carefully but not performed too
                                           frequently. A successful bone marrow transplant can cure aplastic
                                           anemia, particularly in children with an HLA-identical sibling donor
                                           who does not show signs of chromosome breakage. Reduced-intensity
                                           cytotoxic therapies are used, as Fanconi’s patients are unusually
                                           sensitive to chemotherapy. Prognosis in these patients is typically
                                           complicated by the development of malignancies, particularly head
                                           and neck cancers and other solid tumors.

                                                                                                                  171
                         CASE 7                    A 43-year-old African-American man is brought to the emergency department after
                                                    losing consciousness during a barbecue. Earlier that morning when getting out of
                                                    bed, he felt dizzy and had to steady himself against the doorframe of the bathroom.
                                                    He is generally healthy, although he recently had a bad sinus infection for which he
                                                    received trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 4 days ago from his primary physician. Upon
                                                    examination, he is tachycardic and tachypneic. His sclerae are icteric, but the rest of
                                                    his examination is unremarkable. He has never been anemic in the past, but at this
                                                    time laboratory studies reveal a hemoglobin of 9.1 mg/dL, a normal white count, white
                                                    cell differential and platelet count. The reticulocyte count is elevated. The bilirubin is
                                                    elevated, and fractionation reveals that the bilirubin is predominantly indirect.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deﬁciency. This is an
                                                                   X-linked recessive disorder in which the ability of erythrocytes to
                                                                   defend themselves against oxidative stresses is reduced. It primarily
                                                                   affects African-American males; female carriers are rarely affected. A
                                                                   Mediterranean variant (favism) has also been described. Remember the
                                                                   three oxidant drug groups that induce this hemolytic anemia as AAA:
                                                                    Antibiotics (e.g., sulfamethoxazole).
                                                                    Antimalarials (e.g., primaquine).
                                                                    Antipyretics (e.g., acetanilid, but not aspirin or acetaminophen).

                         What is the pathogenesis of this         G6PD is an enzyme that protects RBCs from hemolysis. It is the

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                          condition?                               ﬁrst enzyme in the hexose-monophosphate pathway (HMP) shunt.
                                                                   The pathway produces reduced glutathione, which protects RBCs
                                                                   from oxidative stresses by disposing of hydrogen peroxide; NADPH,
                                                                   produced in the G6PD step, is a cofactor for glutathione reductase.
                                                                   Without reduced glutathione, hemoglobin can be oxidized by
                                                                   hydrogen peroxide. Oxidized hemoglobin aggregates into clumps
                                                                   called Heinz bodies, which damage RBC membranes and make them
                                                                   susceptible to disposal by the spleen. Increased splenic destruction is
                                                                   responsible for the hemolytic anemia seen in G6PD deﬁciency.
                         What tests could be used to              A peripheral blood smear, though not diagnostic for G6PD deﬁciency,
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    is most sensitive during hemolytic episodes. Hemoglobin aggregates, or
                                                                   Heinz bodies, can be visualized in the periphery of red blood cells (see
                                                                   Figure 7-4). Damage to mature RBCs leads to reticulocytosis, with an
                                                                   elevation of serum LDH, low serum haptoglobin, and elevated indirect
                                                                   bilirubin. In addition, portions of the red cells are missing, giving
                                                                   them the appearance of having a “bite” taken out of them. These
                                                                   indentations occur at locations where hemoglobin aggregates have
                                                                   been removed by the spleen. Enzymatic assays for G6PD may return
                                                                   low levels during nonhemolytic episodes but may be paradoxically
                                                                   normal during hemolysis, as the defective cells have been eliminated.

                        172
 What is the most appropriate         There is no speciﬁc treatment for G6PD deﬁciency. However, patients
  treatment for this condition?        must be advised to avoid substances that will precipitate a hemolytic
                                       episode. These include malaria medications such as quinine,
                                       antibiotics such as sulfonamides and nitrofurantoin, and foods such as
                                       fava beans.
 What is the prognosis for patients   The prognosis in these patients is good, since hemolytic episodes are
  with this condition?                 precipitated by speciﬁc medications and foods that can be avoided.

                                                                                                                     H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                       FIGURE 7-4.      Blood mixed with hypotonic solution of crystal violet re-
                                       veals precipitates of denatured hemoglobin (Heinz bodies) within the cells.
                                       (Reproduced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ,
                                       Seligsohn U, Kaushansky K, Prchal JT. Williams Hematology, 7th ed. New
                                       York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Color Plate IV-4.)

                                                                                                               173
                         CASE 8                    A 53-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of weight loss and
                                                    difﬁculty eating as much as he used to. He denies difﬁculty swallowing but reports that
                                                    he feels full after much less food than previously. When questioned, he describes several
                                                    months of fatigue that he attributed to the frequent colds he has had. He has no past
                                                    medical history except hypertension, which is well-controlled on hydrochlorothiazide.
                                                    On physical examination, he appears pale with multiple bruises over both legs. There
                                                    is a palpable, nontender mass in his left upper quadrant on abdominal examination.
                                                    The physician orders a complete blood count with peripheral smear, which is shown
                                                    in Figure 7-5. The abnormal cells stain positive for tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
                                                    (TRAP).

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                    FIGURE 7-5.      Peripheral blood smear demonstrating abnormal circulating lymphocytes.
                                                    (Reproduced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, Seligsohn U, Kaus-
                                                    hansky K, Prchal JT. Williams Hematology, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig.
                                                    93-1.)

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Hairy cell leukemia. This is an uncommon lymphoproliferative
                                                                   disorder distinguished by circulating B lymphocytes with characteristic
                                                                   “hairy” cytoplasmic projections. It accounts for an estimated 2–3%
                                                                   of adult leukemias in the United States. Massive splenomegaly and
                                                                   pancytopenia are the most frequent presenting symptoms.

                         What tests could be used to              TRAP staining of peripheral blood smears is positive in 90% of cases.
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    Additionally, the hairy cells have a unique immunophenotype with
                                                                   expression of CD103 and can be identiﬁed by immunohistochemistry
                                                                   using an anti-CD103 antibody.
                         What is the most appropriate             Given his symptomatic splenomegaly and pancytopenia, this patient
                          treatment for this condition?            requires immediate treatment; 90% of patients require treatment
                                                                   at some point during the disease. Cladribine, a purine nucleoside
                                                                   analog, is the treatment of choice. A single 7-day course of continuous
                                                                   IV cladribine induces prolonged remission in a majority of patients
                                                                   and can be used again to treat patients who relapse. Fever and
                                                                   immunosuppression are the principal adverse effects. Newer therapies
                                                                   include rituximab and interferon. Splenectomy can rapidly reverse
                                                                   peripheral cytopenias in patients with severe disease.
                         What is the prognosis for patients       Prognosis is very good. Patients initially treated with cladribine can
                          with this condition?                     expect a 5-year event-free survival rate > 90%.

                        174
 CASE 9                    A 7-year-old boy is brought to the emergency department (ED) after falling on the
                            playground and hurting his knee. He collided with a classmate while running across the
                            schoolyard and fell on the pavement. No medical history is available; a teacher’s aide
                            accompanies the patient to the ED. She became concerned when his knee became
                            terribly swollen and she was unable to stop the bleeding. Upon examination, the
                            patient is extremely uncomfortable, his knee is warm and tender, and there is a large
                            hematoma on the anterior aspect of the knee. The patient also has cuts on both elbows
                            that continue to bleed, as well as a number of contusions elsewhere on his arms and
                            legs. The rest of the examination is unremarkable, laboratory studies reveal a normal
                            CBC, including a normal platelet count, a normal prothrombin time, and a markedly
                            elevated partial thromboplastin time. X-rays of the leg are negative for fractures in the
                            femur, tibia, and ﬁbula.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Hemophilia. This is a disorder of coagulation that leads to increased
                                          bleeding as a result of deﬁciency in one of two clotting factors.
                                          Hemophilia A, which is much more common, is a deﬁciency of
                                          factor VIII, while hemophilia B is associated with factor IX. Both
                                          are X-linked recessive diseases and cannot be distinguished based on
                                          clinical presentation and symptoms. Women are generally unaffected
                                          carriers unless extreme mosaicism is present. Patients bruise easily and
                                          bleed into joints and muscles. More severe bleeding can occur in the

                                                                                                                        H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                          abdomen, retroperitoneum, or central nervous system. Furthermore,
                                          trauma or surgical interventions can lead to severe bleeding.

 What is the pathogenesis of this        Factor VIII is a critical component of the clotting cascade. It increases
  condition?                              the rate of cleavage of factor X by activated factor IX. In plasma, factor
                                          VIII travels in a complex with von Willebrand factor (vWF). In the
                                          absence of factors VIII or IX, clotting is impaired, and patients bleed
                                          longer.
 What tests could be used to             Prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                   (aPTT) are not always helpful, since they can be normal in patients
                                          with mild disease. In more severe disease, the PT will still be normal,
                                          but the aPTT will be prolonged. The diagnosis can be conﬁrmed only
                                          by assays for the speciﬁc clotting factors.
 What is the most appropriate            Factor replacement—either recombinant or plasma-derived/
  treatment for this condition?           puriﬁed—is the most effective method to control bleeding in
                                          hemophilia patients. The recombinant factors are more pure but
                                          also signiﬁcantly more expensive. Plasma-derived factors are effective
                                          but disadvantageous because of the risk of transmission of blood-
                                          borne viruses (e.g., hepatitis B or C); additionally, plasma-derived
                                          concentrates of factor IX can contain other clotting factors that lead to
                                          paradoxical clotting. With repeated treatments, patients may develop
                                          antibodies to clotting factors, which complicates management and
                                          necessitates pathway-bypassing products (i.e., factor Vlla).
 What is the prognosis for patients      Management of patients with hemophilia is complicated,
  with this condition?                    particularly when the bleeding is within or above the neck or in
                                          the retroperitoneum, or if compartment syndrome is suspected.
                                          Determining the proper dose of factor replacement necessary for acute
                                          bleeding is also challenging; patients who require repeated treatments
                                          must be hospitalized.

                                                                                                                 175
                         CASE 10                   A 23-year-old man visits his primary physician after 1 month of night sweats. He says
                                                    that for the past 6 weeks he has had general malaise, which he attributes to the stress of
                                                    his new job as an investment banker and his crumbling relationship with his girlfriend.
                                                    He has lost about 4.5 kg (10 1b) during this time. He has been healthy in the past and is
                                                    conscientious about eating a balanced diet and exercising daily. His family history is
                                                    unremarkable. He does not smoke, drinks one to two beers per week, and denies
                                                    intravenous drug use. He denies international travel and says he had a negative puriﬁed
                                                    protein derivative (PPD) test before starting his new job. On examination, his
                                                    temperature is 38.1° C (100.5° F), blood pressure is 120/65 mm Hg, heart rate is 80/
                                                    min, and respiratory rate is 16/min. His examination is within normal limits, with the
                                                    exception of a palpable cervical lymph node, which is ﬁrm, painless, and approximately
                                                    2 cm in diameter. Results of excisional biopsy are shown in Figure 7-6.

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                    FIGURE 7-6.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, Se-
                                                    ligsohn U, Kaushansky K, Prchal JT. Williams Hematology, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                                    2006: Color Plate XXII-32.)

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Hodgkin’s lymphoma. This is a painless lymphadenopathy that can
                                                                   only be conclusively diagnosed by excisional lymph node biopsy
                                                                   (not ﬁne needle aspiration). Many patients present with a painless
                                                                   neck mass, while a minority have constitutional symptoms such as
                                                                   fever, night sweats, and weight loss. The age of onset has a bimodal
                                                                   distribution, with peaks in the 20s and the 50s. There are multiple
                                                                   types of Hodgkin’s disease, which are classiﬁed by the types of cells
                                                                   that proliferate: nodular sclerosing, mixed cellularity, lymphocyte
                                                                   predominant, and lymphocyte depleted. The differential includes
                                                                   other malignant lymphomas as well as causes of reactive lymph nodes
                                                                   (mononucleosis, autoimmune disorders, drug reactions, and Bartonella
                                                                   henselae infection or cat-scratch disease).

                         What is the pathogenesis of this         Hodgkin’s disease is a collection of cancers in which Reed-Sternberg
                          condition?                               cells (giant, multinucleated macrophages seen in Figure 7-6) appear
                                                                   in a background of reactive cellularity. These specialized cells have an
                                                                   “owl’s eye” appearance. The exact etiology of the disease is unknown,
                                                                   but there is some evidence suggesting a role for Epstein-Barr virus
                                                                   (EBV). Remember the Hodgkin’s lymphoma classiﬁcations that
                                                                   accompany tumor staging:
                                                                   A: Asymptomatic
                                                                   B: Bad

                        176
 What tests could be used to          Hodgkin’s lymphoma can only be diagnosed conclusively by lymph
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                node biopsy with careful histologic examination for the presence
                                       of Reed-Sternberg cells. Fine needle aspirate of lymph nodes often
                                       provides inadequate tissue sample for diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate         Treatment is dictated by staging, which is based on the number of
  treatment for this condition?        involved lymph node areas. In the past, patients with low-risk disease
                                       (stages I and II) were primarily treated with radiation therapy; however,
                                       long-term follow-up has shown an unacceptable late incidence of
                                       radiation-related malignancies. As a result, lower-stage patients are
                                       generally treated with chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy.
                                       Patients with higher stages of disease (stages III and IV) respond well
                                       to combination chemotherapy, often with agents such as doxorubicin,
                                       bleomycin, dacarbazine, and vincristine.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Patients with low-stage disease who respond well to radiation or
  with this condition?                 chemotherapy have an excellent prognosis, with 10-year survival
                                       rates > 80%. Those with disseminated disease have 5-year survival
                                       rates of about 60%. Prognosis worsens with increasing age and
                                       tumor bulk, as well as for patients who have lymphocyte depletion
                                       or mixed cellularity. Relapses are best addressed with high-dose
                                       chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation; a cure in
                                       these cases is possible in 35–50% of cases if the tumor is still sensitive

                                                                                                                    H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                       to chemotherapeutic agents.

                                                                                                              177
                         CASE 11                       A 21-year-old woman presents to her gynecologist after 1 year of dysmenorrhea and
                                                        menorrhagia. She recalls having seven or eight periods over the past 12 months, all of
                                                        which were heavier than normal. She previously went to the gym ﬁve times per week
                                                        but is now unable to exercise because she feels she “cannot keep up.” In addition, she
                                                        has been feeling tired for the past 3 months and has trouble waking up each morning
                                                        because she feels exhausted instead of refreshed. She is not taking any medications and
                                                        denies smoking, alcohol consumption, and illicit drug use. She eats a well-balanced
                                                        diet, and coagulation studies are normal. Her vital signs include a heart rate of 92/min,
                                                        blood pressure of 135/80 mm Hg, and respiratory rate of 20/min. Her examination is
                                                        otherwise unremarkable. Relevant laboratory results are as follows:
                                                        WBC count: 5600/mm3
                                                        Hemoglobin: 9.2 g/dL
                                                        Platelet count: 225,000/mL
                                                        Mean corpuscular hemoglobin: 21 pg
                                                        Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration: 29%
                                                        Mean corpuscular volume: 72 fL

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?           Iron-deﬁciency anemia. The most common cause of anemia, this is
                                                                       particularly common in women with heavy, irregular menses. Iron-
                                                                       deﬁciency anemia is microcytic and hypochromic and can easily be
                                                                       detected on a peripheral blood smear (Figure 7-7). Cells exhibit central

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                       pallor and are smaller than expected.

                         What is the pathogenesis of this             More than half of the body’s iron is stored within red blood cells.
                          condition?                                   Therefore, iron deﬁciency most often results from an imbalance
                                                                       between iron intake and loss of RBCs from the body through bleeding.
                                                                       It is rarely due to internal destruction of RBCs, as the body is able
                                                                       to recycle iron released by hemolysis. The source of the bleeding is
                                                                       often the gastrointestinal tract; however, menorrhagia should also be
                                                                       considered in menstruating women.
                         What other screening might be                Though the history points toward iron deﬁciency as the most likely
                          necessary for this patient?                  cause in this patient, other causes of microcytic anemia exist. If
                                                                       laboratory studies such as iron and iron binding capacity conﬁrm
                                                                       iron deﬁciency, additional causes need not be considered. If iron
                                                                       deﬁciency is not conﬁrmed, other causes such as thalassemias, a
                                                                       group of inherited blood disorders, must be considered. For some
                                                                       of these patients, genetic screening may be desirable. Hemoglobin
                                                                       electrophoresis (hemoglobin A2) is necessary to diagnose thalassemia
                                                                       trait.
                         What tests could be used to                  A CBC is helpful because the decreased hemoglobin indicates anemia,
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                        while the low values of MCV, MCH, and MCHC suggest a microcytic
                                                                       process. To conﬁrm the presence of an iron-deﬁciency anemia, it is
                                                                       best to directly examine iron stores. Serum iron levels < 60 μg/dL are
                                                                       suggestive. An iron to iron binding capacity ratio of less than 10% is
                                                                       strongly suggestive of iron deﬁciency. Serum ferritin levels < 20–30
                                                                       ng/dL indicate that stored iron is depleted in the absence of
                                                                       inﬂammation (< 50–100 if iron deﬁciency and chronic inﬂammation
                                                                       are both present). The gold standard for identifying iron-deﬁciency
                                                                       anemia is a bone marrow examination with Prussian blue staining,
                                                                       which will reveal depleted iron stores; however, the diagnosis is
                                                                       usually made when oral iron supplementation produces marked
                                                                       reticulocytosis, and marrow examination is rarely necessary.

                        178
 What is the most appropriate    Dietary modiﬁcation to include sources of iron such as red meats, ﬁsh
  treatment for this condition?   and leafy green vegetables would be helpful in a patient who does not
                                  follow a balanced diet. In this case, the patient would probably beneﬁt
                                  from iron supplementation. Supplementation is typically oral, but
                                  can be intramuscular or intravenous in patients who do not tolerate
                                  the gastrointestinal side effects of oral iron. Vitamin C increases the
                                  bioavailability of oral iron and may be beneﬁcial.

                                                                                                                       H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                  F I G U R E 7 - 7.   Peripheral blood smear shows microcytic hypochromic
                                  normoblasts. (Reproduced, with permission, from the Pathology Education
                                  Instructional Resource Digital Library [http://peir.net] at the University of Ala-
                                  bama, Birmingham.)

                                                                                                                179
                         CASE 12                   A 69-year-old man presents to the community clinic complaining of pain in his
                                                    right thigh for the past 2 months. He also reports fatigue for the past few weeks. The
                                                    pain is constant and knifelike and is always midway between his hip and his knee;
                                                    it does not radiate. He rates the pain 9/10 and says that he feels like it is deep in his
                                                    bones. He denies any trauma to the area; femoral x-rays are negative for fracture. He
                                                    says that sometimes he feels a similar pain in his ribs; x-ray of the chest is negative
                                                    for rib fractures. About 3 months earlier, he suffered a severe bout of pneumonia
                                                    and was successfully treated. His past medical history is signiﬁcant only for essential
                                                    hypertension, for which he is taking hydrochlorothiazide. He quit smoking 20 years ago
                                                    but enjoys a glass of brandy after dinner every night. He denies any intravenous drug
                                                    use. Relevant laboratory results are as follows:
                                                    Hemoglobin: 9.1 mg/dL
                                                    Mean corpuscular volume: 72 fL
                                                    Glucose (nonfasting): 135 mg/dL
                                                    Serum Na+: 142 mEq/dL
                                                    Serum K+: 3.4 mEq/dL
                                                    Serum Ca2+: 17 mg/dL

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Multiple myeloma. One of the plasma cell dyscrasias, multiple
                                                                   myeloma is characterized by excessive bone marrow replacement, bone
                                                                   destruction, and excess release of paraproteins (abnormal proteins)

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                   by malignant plasma cells. Patients present with anemia and can
                                                                   progress to bone marrow failure. Some have complications associated
                                                                   with plasmacytomas, tumors that may compress the spinal cord.
                                                                   Often, patients have bone pain, osteoporosis, pathologic fractures, and
                                                                   hypercalcemia as a result of the increased insult to the bone and the
                                                                   release of stored calcium into the bloodstream. Excess light chains can
                                                                   deposit in the kidneys and lead to renal failure. Patients are also more
                                                                   susceptible to infection, particularly with encapsulated organisms such
                                                                   as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae.

                         What is the pathogenesis of this         Multiple myeloma is a form of plasma cell tumor (Figure 7-8); it is not
                          condition?                               a malignancy of the bone. Many patients will present with a preceding
                                                                   MGUS (monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined signiﬁcance),
                                                                   which is present in 1–3% of the population. Proliferation of plasma
                                                                   cells can interfere with the proper function of the bone marrow
                                                                   and lead to anemia, and, much less commonly, leukopenia and
                                                                   thrombocytopenia. Abnormal plasma cells also stimulate osteoclasts,
                                                                   leading to osteoporosis and an increase in fractures.
                         What tests could be used to              Multiple myeloma patients are almost universally anemic. Their red
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    blood cells may appear structurally normal on peripheral blood smears
                                                                   (Figure 7-9) but will often be seen in rouleau formation due to the
                                                                   presence of abnormal, negatively charged γ-globulins. Rarely, a plasma
                                                                   cell will be visible in the smear. Serum protein electrophoresis can be
                                                                   used to detect paraproteins. Radiography is important to identify lytic
                                                                   lesions in the bone or unexpected osteoporosis. Since myeloma is a
                                                                   malignancy, the diagnosis depends on obtaining tissue, in this case,
                                                                   through a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy.

                        180
 What is the most appropriate                   Patients who present with multiple myeloma require treatment
  treatment for this condition?                  of their malignancy as well as their symptoms (e.g., bone pain,
                                                 hypercalcemia, fractures). No curative therapies exist. Thalidomide
                                                 and dexamethasone have replaced VAD chemotherapy (vincristine,
                                                 doxorubicin [Adriamycin], and dexamethasone) as standard induction
                                                 therapy; however, this regimen is associated with an increased risk of
                                                 deep venous thrombosis. Once initial treatments are implemented
                                                 (induction therapy), autologous stem cell transplantation can be
                                                 considered, particularly in patients < 70 years of age. Lenalinomide,
                                                 a thalidomide analog, and bortezomib have improved survival in this
                                                 disease as well. Allogenic transplantation is also possible but carries a
                                                 40–50% mortality rate in these patients.
 What is the prognosis for patients             The Durie-Salmon or International Stage of the patient is often used
  with this condition?                           to determine prognosis. Prognosis depends on the degree of end-
                                                 organ damage (anemia, low albumin, lytic lesions, renal failure) and
                                                 proliferative rate (β2 microglobulin) of the plasma cells. Cytogenetic
                                                 ﬁndings may also be important. Patients with milder forms have a
                                                 median survival of 5–6 years, while those with severe disease may only
                                                 live 1–2 years without autologous transplantation.

                                                                                                                             H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY

FIGURE 7-8.       High magniﬁcation H&E stain shows               FIGURE 7-9.       RBCs in a rouleaux formation. (Repro-
plasma cells. (Reproduced, with permission, from the Pa-          duced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler E,
thology Education Instructional Resource Digital Library          Kipps TJ, Seligsohn U, Kaushansky K, Prchal JT. Williams
[http://peir.net] at the University of Alabama, Birmingham.)      Hematology, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Color
                                                                  Plate 1–8.)

                                                                                                                       181
                         CASE 13                    A 26-year-old woman loses consciousness in her front yard and is rushed to the
                                                     emergency department (ED) by her husband. He is concerned that she hit her head on
                                                     the driveway when she fell, but she is conscious, alert, and oriented soon after arrival in
                                                     the ED. Her neurological examination is normal, and imaging studies are negative for
                                                     intracranial hemorrhage. While in the evaluation room, she says she may have cut her
                                                     mouth when she fell. Upon closer inspection, the blood in her mouth is discovered to
                                                     be gingival in origin, and she is also noted to have epistaxis and nonpalpable purpura
                                                     on her arms and legs. When asked about other abnormal bleeding, the patient notes
                                                     that her menses have been heavier than normal for the past 4 months and that she had
                                                     noticed the purpura on her limbs approximately 1 month ago but thought it was “winter
                                                     skin.” Relevant laboratory results include a hemoglobin of 12.8 mg/dL, hematocrit of
                                                     37%, WBC count of 6600/mm3, and platelet count of 7300/mm3.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?        Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). In childhood, isolated
                                                                    episodes of ITP can follow a viral infection. The adult form, however,
                                                                    is chronic, rarely associated with a prodromal illness, and commonly
                                                                    occurs between the ages of 20 and 50 years. It is twice as common in
                                                                    female patients as in males. Patients typically present with bleeding:
                                                                    epistaxis, gingival bleeding, menorrhagia, purpura, and petechiae. The
                                                                    spleen is characteristically of normal size in ITP.

                         What is the pathogenesis of this          An autoimmune disease of the platelets, ITP is associated with

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                          condition?                                overproduction of IgG that targets platelets for destruction by the
                                                                    spleen. The speciﬁc platelet antigen is not known, but the Fc receptors
                                                                    on splenic macrophages bind antibody-coated platelets.
                         What conditions should be                 Isolated thrombocytopenia is ITP in over 99% of cases. Drug-induced
                          included in the differential              thrombocytopenia is also possible, and a patient history that includes
                          diagnosis?                                sulfonamides, quinine, thiazides, cimetidine, gold, or heparin
                                                                    may be suggestive; heparin is the most common inpatient cause.
                                                                    Myelodysplasia and other diseases of bone marrow failure can be
                                                                    ruled out by examining the bone marrow, which will be normal in
                                                                    ITP except for an increased number of megakaryocytes. Other causes
                                                                    of peripheral thrombocytopenia include disseminated intravascular
                                                                    coagulation, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic-
                                                                    uremic syndrome, hypersplenism, and sepsis. However, in patients
                                                                    with isolated thrombocytopenia in the absence of systemic signs and
                                                                    symptoms, an immune origin must be suspected.
                         What tests could be used to               The hallmark of ITP is thrombocytopenia. Other blood cell lines
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                     are normal, although the bleeding can lead to mild anemia. The
                                                                    peripheral blood smear will show a signiﬁcant absence of mature
                                                                    platelets and some enlarged (immature) platelets (megathrombocytes).
                         What is the most appropriate              ITP in adults does not typically undergo spontaneous remission as
                          treatment for this condition?             it does in children, so the ﬁrst line of treatment is corticosteroids
                                                                    (methylprednisolone, prednisone, or dexamethasone). Steroid
                                                                    treatment will increase vascular stability even before resolving
                                                                    the thrombocytopenia. Prednisone may be curative, but in many
                                                                    patients, stopping treatment can lead to a recurrence of the disease.
                                                                    Splenectomy is often employed as second-line therapy, but it too
                                                                    is associated with relapses in up to a third of patients. Intravenous
                                                                    immunoglobulin or Rho(D) immune globulin (in Rh-positive patients)
                                                                    are often used to increase the duration of response. In patients with
                                                                    refractory disease, danazol or immunosuppressive agents such as
                                                                    vincristine, rituximab, or cyclosporine can be successful.

                        182
 CASE 14                   A 12-year-old girl is admitted to the hospital for chemotherapy for refractory leukemia.
                            With the exception of common side effects such as nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite,
                            and malaise, her treatment course over the past year has been uneventful. Routine
                            laboratory tests are ordered, and the medications are prepared. As she changes
                            into a hospital gown, the patient notes that she is sweating, and a nurse determines
                            that her temperature is 38.9° C (102.1° F). Her blood pressure is 90/55 mm Hg,
                            pulse is 100/min, and respiratory rate is 17/min. An intravenous line is started with
                            normal saline and broad-spectrum antibiotics plus antifungal coverage instead of her
                            chemotherapeutic agents. Relevant laboratory results include a WBC count of 900/
                            mm3.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Neutropenic fever. Deﬁned as a neutrophil count below 2000/mm3,
                                          neutropenia renders patients increasingly susceptible to bacterial and
                                          fungal infections, particularly Candida and Aspergillus. Patients can
                                          be asymptomatic or may present with varying degrees of infection
                                          or sepsis, depending on their level of neutropenia. Some patients
                                          live comfortably at chronically low neutrophil levels without serious
                                          infectious consequences. Common infections include septicemia,
                                          stomatitis, cellulitis, and pneumonia.

 What is the pathogenesis of this        Neutropenia has many causes, including bone marrow hypoplasia,
  condition?                              ineffective neutropoiesis (resulting from exaggerated apoptosis of

                                                                                                                       H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                          late precursors), and increased removal or utilization of circulating
                                          neutrophils. If isolated, it is typically drug-induced by agents such
                                          as sulfonamides, penicillin, chlorpromazine, and chemotherapeutic
                                          drugs, or related to autoimmune disorders (i.e., lupus). Cancer or
                                          infection, such as sepsis or HIV, can lead to invasion of the bone
                                          marrow with subsequent neutropenia. Furthermore, folate or vitamin
                                          B12 deﬁciencies can lead to arrest in the maturation of neutrophils.
                                          Lastly, destruction of neutrophils, as in hypersplenism, can also lead
                                          to neutropenia. In this case, marrow replacement by the leukemia or
                                          marrow suppression by prior chemotherapy is the obvious cause.
 What tests could be used to             A decreased absolute neutrophil count is diagnostic for neutropenia.
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                   A bone marrow biopsy can establish a speciﬁc diagnosis if one has not
                                          previously been made. Peripheral blood ﬂow cytometry may assist in
                                          the diagnosis of large granular lymphocyte syndrome.
 What is the most appropriate            Treatment for neutropenia should address the underlying cause of
  treatment for this condition?           neutrophil suppression. Causative pharmacologic agents should be
                                          discontinued. Infections should be covered with broad-spectrum
                                          antibiotics, with particular coverage of enteric gram-negative bacteria.
                                          The physician should also have a low threshold for adding antifungal
                                          coverage. In-hospital therapy is typically recommended for febrile
                                          patients with neutropenia, especially those with symptoms, prolonged
                                          neutropenia, or an underlying hematologic malignancy. Exogenous
                                          growth factor support and prophylactic antibiotics may reduce the
                                          hospital stay but have not been shown to impact mortality or risk of
                                          severe infections in chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. Idiopathic or
                                          cyclic cases often respond to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
 What is the prognosis for patients      The prognosis depends on the cause and duration of the neutropenia,
  with this condition?                    the degree of bone marrow suppression, and the severity of infection.

                                                                                                                 183
                         CASE 15                   A 58-year-old man presents to the emergency department complaining, “I can’t stop
                                                    itching all over, and my eyes are blurry.” He successfully installed a new showerhead
                                                    in his bathroom this weekend and took a long, hot shower to test it. A few minutes
                                                    after the shower, his hands began to itch, and the sensation soon spread to his trunk
                                                    and his limbs. He used the same soap he has used for the past few years and has lived
                                                    in his current house for nearly three decades. He regularly completes small home
                                                    improvement projects around the home but has never experienced these symptoms in
                                                    the past; he denies any allergies. Upon examination, he is ﬁdgeting and uncomfortable.
                                                    He repeatedly scratches his arms, legs, and abdomen, and tries to reach his back. His
                                                    face is very red and warm to the touch. His temperature is 38.3° C (101° F), blood
                                                    pressure is 140/80 mm Hg, heart rate is 92/min, and respiratory rate is 16/min. He
                                                    complains of a dull, throbbing headache that he rates 5/10 on the pain scale. His
                                                    examination is remarkable for a palpable spleen and excoriated skin on his arms, legs,
                                                    and abdomen. Relevant laboratory results include a hemoglobin of 20.5 mg/dL, a
                                                    hematocrit of 62%, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 2 mm/hr.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?      Polycythemia vera. This is deﬁned as a condition in which the
                                                                  hematocrit exceeds 50%. There are two causes: relative, in which
                                                                  plasma volume has decreased but red cell mass is preserved; or
                                                                  absolute, in which red cell mass is increased regardless of plasma
                                                                  volume. Absolute polycythemia may be reactive, as in heavy smokers,

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                  or may indicate a myeloproliferative disorder, polycythemia rubra vera.
                                                                  These patients typically present with malaise, fever, ruddy complexion
                                                                  (plethora), and pruritus after a warm shower. Some will also have
                                                                  cardiovascular symptoms (stroke, MI, claudication, headache) as a
                                                                  result of vascular congestion. Splenomegaly is a common ﬁnding in
                                                                  these patients. Primary polycythemia is idiopathic and is commonly
                                                                  referred to as polycythemia vera. Remember the symptoms with the
                                                                  mnemonic Polycythemia Rubra Vera (PRV): Plethora/Pruritus,
                                                                  Ringing in ears, and Visual blurring. Secondary polycythemia is
                                                                  associated with oxygen deprivation, as in the setting of COPD or other
                                                                  lung diseases, high altitudes, erythropoietin-producing tumors, or
                                                                  smoking (an increase in carboxyhemoglobin).

                         What is the pathogenesis of this        Polycythemia is an excess in either the size or number of red blood
                          condition?                              cells. It can be primary, secondary (related to elevated levels of
                                                                  erythropoietin), or spurious (resulting from a decrease in plasma
                                                                  volume). It may be apparent or inapparent (masked by iron deﬁciency
                                                                  or another cause of anemia). A rare familial form also exists and
                                                                  is associated with hyperresponsive erythropoietin receptors. In the
                                                                  nonfamilial secondary forms, erythropoietin can be elevated due to
                                                                  environmental causes, such as hypoxia from lung disease or higher
                                                                  elevations. Alternatively, abnormal causes such as ectopic production
                                                                  or renal artery stenosis can lead to elevations in erythropoietin.

                        184
 What tests could be used to          A CBC with differential is useful in the diagnosis of polycythemia.
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                Hemoglobin will often be > 16 mg/dL in women and 18 mg/dL in
                                       men, and the RBC mass (tagged RBC scan) will be increased. In
                                       primary disease, erythropoietin levels are low; in secondary disease,
                                       they are high. However, overlap in erythropoietin levels and decrease
                                       in erythropoietin levels as the hematocrit rises limits the value of
                                       erythropoietin levels as a diagnostic test. WBC levels and platelet
                                       counts are typically normal, but it is possible to see patients present
                                       with an elevation in both the RBC and WBC lines, including basophils
                                       and eosinophils. JAK2 mutations are commonly found (> 90%) and
                                       may contribute to the erythropoietin-independent colony growth
                                       seen in polycythemia vera. This test has become the cornerstone of
                                       diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate         The most effective treatment for polycythemia is serial phlebotomy.
  treatment for this condition?        It reduces blood volume and lowers the risk of cardiovascular events.
                                       Aspirin is helpful in reducing stroke risk, and hydroxyurea can be used
                                       to suppress hyperactive bone marrow, if necessary, although there is a
                                       risk for secondary leukemia with this agent.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Primary polycythemia (polycythemia vera) increases the risk of
  with this condition?                 conversion to myeloﬁbrosis or acute myelogenous leukemia. This
                                       risk is associated with the duration of the disease and exposure to

                                                                                                                   H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                       chemotherapeutic agents and radioactive phosphorus.

                                                                                                             185
                         CASE 16                   A 15-month-old African-American boy is brought to the emergency department by
                                                    his parents because they have been unable to get him to stop crying. The child has
                                                    been in distress for the past hour, ever since the family returned from a day hike. The
                                                    parents deny any trauma, and he was healthy and happy earlier that morning. His
                                                    mother notes that her pregnancy and delivery were both uneventful and that her son
                                                    has been relatively healthy, with the exception of occasional colds. Upon examination,
                                                    he appears uncomfortable and is crying inconsolably. He is tachycardic and tachypneic,
                                                    and his lips are slightly cyanotic. His right knee appears swollen, and when the
                                                    physician tries to examine it, the crying worsens and the child pulls away. His oxygen
                                                    saturation on room air is 85%. Relevant laboratory results are as follows:
                                                    WBC count: 10,500/mm3                  Mean corpuscular hemoglobin: 27 pg
                                                    Hemoglobin: 8.6 mg/dL                  Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
                                                    Hematocrit: 25%                          concentration: 31%
                                                    Mean corpuscular volume: 78 fL         Platelet count: 500,000/mm3

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?      Sickle cell anemia. An autosomal recessive disorder associated with a
                                                                  point mutation in the hemoglobin gene, sickle cell anemia typically
                                                                  presents during the ﬁrst year of life and primarily affects children of
                                                                  African-American descent. There is usually a strong family history for
                                                                  sickle cell anemia, and prenatal testing is now available. Patients have
                                                                  a chronic hemolytic anemia that predisposes them to a number of

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                  additional complications. Acutely painful sickle cell “crises” may occur
                                                                  as a result of infection, hypoxia, or dehydration. During a crisis, the
                                                                  microvasculature of an affected organ or body part becomes clogged
                                                                  with abnormal red blood cells that impair circulation. The occlusion
                                                                  can last from hours to days and may be accompanied by a fever.
                                                                  Common sites include the back, limbs, and chest. Remember the
                                                                  complications of sickle cell disease using the mnemonic SICKLE:
                                                                  Strokes/Swelling of hands and feet/Splenic sequestration
                                                                  Infections (ulcers, osteomyelitis)/Infarctions
                                                                  Crises (painful, sequestration, aplastic)/Cholelithiasis/Chest syndrome/
                                                                  Chronic hemolysis/Cardiac problems
                                                                  Kidney disease
                                                                  Liver disease/Lung problems
                                                                  Erection (priapism)/Eye problems (retinopathy)

                         What is the pathogenesis of this        A point mutation in the sixth position of the hemoglobin gene results
                          condition?                              in the insertion of valine instead of glutamate into the polypeptide
                                                                  chain. As a result of this substitution, an abnormal hemoglobin
                                                                  tetramer (HbS) forms (α2βs2) that assumes a concave shape when
                                                                  deoxygenated; this shape change, known as sickling, results in injury
                                                                  to the red blood cells. The sickling is reversible if oxygen is returned to
                                                                  the environment, but repeated sickling can permanently injure a cell
                                                                  and render it suitable for elimination by the spleen. Symptoms typically
                                                                  present as the transition from fetal to adult hemoglobin begins, and
                                                                  production converts from γ-globin chains to defective β-globin chains.

                        186
 What tests and/or imaging tools   A CBC is helpful in the diagnosis of sickle cell anemia. Patients have
  could be used to conﬁrm the       chronic anemia, with hematocrit levels around 20–30%. Patients may
  diagnosis?                        also have thrombocytosis, increased WBCs, and elevated indirect
                                    bilirubin levels. A peripheral blood smear showing abnormally shaped
                                    cells (Figure 7-10) is diagnostic; crescent-shaped (sickled) cells, target
                                    cells, and Howell-Jolly bodies (DNA inclusions) are often present.
                                    Hemoglobin electrophoresis can conﬁrm any diagnostic suspicions;
                                    > 85% of the hemoglobin will be the HbS form, and there will be no
                                    HbA (normal adult form) present. In addition, HbF (fetal form) will be
                                    elevated, since it enables these patients to compensate for their poor
                                    oxygenation states. Sickle cell carriers will typically have 60% HbA and
                                    40% Hb S unless coexistent thalassemia is present.
 What is the most appropriate      Patients with sickle cell disease primarily receive treatment for their
  treatment for this condition?     symptoms as opposed to their disease. Folate supplements are given,
                                    and patients are instructed to avoid factors that precipitate acute crises.
                                    Patients beneﬁt greatly from substances that increase the amount of
                                    fetal hemoglobin in the body, such as hydroxyurea, which can reduce
                                    the frequency of painful, acute crises. The long-term risk of leukemia
                                    with this agent in this population is minimal compared to the risk and
                                    morbidity of recurrent acute crises. In serious cases, transfusions must
                                    be considered.

                                                                                                                  H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY

                                    FIGURE 7-10.       Peripheral blood smear demonstrating abnormal RBCs.
                                    (Reproduced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ,
                                    Seligsohn U, Kaushansky K, Prchal JT. Williams Hematology, 7th ed. New
                                    York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Color Plate III-5.)

                                                                                                           187
                         CASE 17                   A 3-year-old girl is brought to the emergency department after being found unconscious
                                                    in her bed. She is cyanotic, her respiratory rate is 4/min, and her pulse is faint and
                                                    thready. Her mother is frantic and unable to provide a history. She does state that her
                                                    daughter has “a bad blood disease,” which has necessitated numerous transfusions,
                                                    particularly after a round of antibiotic treatment. Despite heroic measures, the child
                                                    does not survive. A peripheral smear shows severe microcytic, hypochromic anemia
                                                    with target cells and poikilocytosis. Emergency laboratory results revealed the following:
                                                    WBC count: 8500/mm3
                                                    Hemoglobin: 6 g/dL
                                                    Hematocrit: 23%
                                                    Mean corpuscular volume: 55 fL
                                                    Reticulocyte count: 6%

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?      α-Thalassemia (hemoglobin H disease). Thalassemias are disorders
                                                                  in which one or more of the α- or β-globin chains are deﬁcient. The
                                                                  deﬁciencies result in a decrease in hemoglobin and ultimately lead to
                                                                  a microcytic, hypochromic anemia. Seen primarily in patients from
                                                                  Southeast Asia and China, the severity of α-thalassemia depends on
                                                                  how many of the four α-globin genes are missing. With three intact
                                                                  genes, patients are said to be silent carriers and are hematologically
                                                                  normal. Individuals with two functional genes have thalassemia

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                  trait. They have an asymptomatic microcytic anemia. With only a
                                                                  single functional α-globin gene, as in this patient, individuals have
                                                                  hemoglobin H disease. They are chronically anemic to varying degrees
                                                                  and will generally have splenomegaly and appear pale. Some may
                                                                  require transfusions after infection or stress to resolve exacerbations of
                                                                  the anemia. When all four α-globin genes are absent, hydrops fetalis
                                                                  occurs; this condition is not compatible with life, and stillbirth usually
                                                                  results.

                         What is the pathogenesis of this        Thalassemias result from the deﬁciency of genes required to construct
                          condition?                              normal forms of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin A, which is the normal
                                                                  adult form, consists of four chains arranged as α2β2. The α-globin
                                                                  chains are required in hemoglobin, while the β-globin chains can be
                                                                  substituted by δ or γ chains to produce other forms: hemoglobin A2
                                                                  (α2δ2) and hemoglobin F (α2γ2). In more severe forms of α-thalassemia,
                                                                  some tetramers made exclusively of β-globin chains can form; these β4
                                                                  forms are referred to as hemoglobin H.
                         What tests could be used to             Patients with hemoglobin H disease are anemic and often have
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                   microcytosis that is out of proportion to the anemia. A low hematocrit
                                                                  level (22–32%) with signiﬁcantly lower MCV (60–70 fL) is suggestive
                                                                  of hemoglobin H disease. A peripheral blood smear is more
                                                                  indicative and will reveal microcytosis, hypochromia, target cells,
                                                                  reticulocytosis, and poikilocytosis (RBCs of abnormal shape; Figure
                                                                  7-11). Furthermore, hemoglobin electrophoresis will demonstrate the
                                                                  presence of a fast-migrating hemoglobin (HbH), which will be no more
                                                                  than 40% of the total sample.
                         What is the most appropriate            Patients with hemoglobin H disease should take folate and avoid
                          treatment for this condition?           causes of oxidative stress, such as sulfonamides, which might worsen
                                                                  their chronic anemia. Splenectomy should be considered if too many
                                                                  transfusions are required. Iron chelation therapy is necessary for iron-
                                                                  overload states.

                        188
FIGURE 7-11.        Peripheral blood smear in hemoglobin H disease. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, Seligsohn U,
Kaushansky K, Prchal JT. Williams Hematology, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2006: Fig. 46-18.)

                                                                              H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY

                                                                       189
                         CASE 18                    A 60-year-old man presents to the emergency department complaining of a persistent
                                                     nosebleed. His nose began bleeding spontaneously about 3 hours ago, and he has not
                                                     been able to get it to stop despite direct pressure and ice packs. He denies trauma,
                                                     blood disorders, cancer, or a family history of hematologic or oncologic problems. He
                                                     has gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD), for which he recently increased his dose
                                                     of cimetidine, and atrial ﬁbrillation, for which he takes metoprolol and warfarin. His
                                                     temperature is 37.0° C (98.6° F), blood pressure is 120/80 mm Hg, heart rate is 90/min,
                                                     and respiratory rate is 10/min. Physical examination is notable for crusted blood around
                                                     his left nasal ala and slowly oozing bright red blood from his left nostril. He also has
                                                     small conjunctival hemorrhages and a large bruise on his knee. The remainder of his
                                                     physical examination is unremarkable, including a regular heart rate and rhythm and
                                                     normal chest, abdominal, and neurologic examinations. Laboratory tests show:
                                                     WBC count: 6000/mm³
                                                     Hemoglobin: 13.5 g/dL
                                                     Hematocrit: 40%
                                                     Platelet count: 350,000/mm³
                                                     International Normalized Ratio: 12.5

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Supratherapeutic warfarin levels. This patient has clinically signiﬁcant,
                                                                   persistent bleeding (epistaxis and other hemorrhagic phenomena)
                                                                   in the context of an International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 12.5

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                   while receiving warfarin therapy. His entire clinical presentation
                                                                   can be explained by his medications. Cimetidine inhibits the
                                                                   cytochrome P450 (CYP450) system of drug metabolism (a hepatic
                                                                   enzymatic system that metabolizes drugs for excretion), and warfarin
                                                                   is metabolized by this system. Thus, a recent increase in cimetidine
                                                                   dosage in a patient who takes warfarin could easily lead to dangerously
                                                                   high warfarin levels, evidenced in this patient by severe bleeding and a
                                                                   high INR.

                         What risk factors are associated         Medications and other compounds that induce the CYP450 system
                          with an increased incidence of           include alcohol, barbiturates, carbamazepine, dexamethasone,
                          this condition?                          griseofulvin, phenytoin, quinidine, and rifampin.
                                                                   Medications and other compounds that inhibit the CYP450 system
                                                                   include cimetidine, clarithromycin, erythromycin, grapefruit juice,
                                                                   isoniazid, ketoconazole, and ritonavir.
                         What is the most appropriate             With an INR > 10 and bleeding, not only must the warfarin be stopped
                          treatment for this condition?            but low-dose vitamin K1 should be given. Larger doses will interfere
                                                                   with reanticoagulation. If bleeding is felt to be life threatening, fresh
                                                                   frozen plasma must be given, as vitamin K works by synthesis of clotting
                                                                   factors and will take over 24 hours to correct the situation. Stopping
                                                                   the drug responsible for the prolonged INR is also crucial. This patient
                                                                   should receive nasal packing and be admitted for observation and
                                                                   serial neurologic exams (monitoring for intracranial hemorrhage), INR
                                                                   assessments, and hemoglobin levels. Finally, this patient should be
                                                                   counseled to use a different histamine blocker for his GERD, such as
                                                                   ranitidine, to avoid this complication in the future.

                        190
 CASE 19                   A 12-year-old African-American girl is brought to the emergency department (ED) by
                            her parents for confusion, fevers, and a new rash over her legs. They report that she had
                            a “stomach bug” two weeks previously but had been getting better except for occasional
                            headaches. This morning, they had difﬁculty waking her, and she remained confused
                            on the way to the ED. On physical examination, her temperature is 40.1° C (104.1° F),
                            pulse is 106/min, blood pressure is 95/70 mm Hg, and respirations are
                            16/min. She is oriented only to person and seems lethargic. Her sclerae are icteric, and
                            there is a pinpoint, nonblanching, macular rash over her lower legs. Initial laboratory
                            ﬁndings include normal white blood cell count and differential, hemoglobin of 8.3
                            mg/dL, hematocrit of 28%, platelets of 13,000/mm3, blood urea nitrogen of 41 mg/dL,
                            and creatinine of 1.6 mg/dL.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura with hemolytic
                                          uremic syndrome (TTP-HUS). TTP is one of the thrombotic
                                          microangiopathies, characterized by a microangiopathic hemolytic
                                          anemia (causing her icterus) and thrombocytopenia (suggested by her
                                          petechiae). Her additional neurologic abnormalities, renal dysfunction,
                                          and fever fulﬁll the classic pentad for TTP-HUS.

 What is the epidemiology of this        Peak incidence occurs in the third decade, but cases have been
  condition?                              reported in all ages. In childhood, the disease often follows
                                          gastroenteritis, especially due to Escherichia coli or Shigella. In adults,

                                                                                                                        H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                          cases are often related to pregnancy, HIV infection, post-transplant
                                          immunosuppression, or collagen vascular diseases such as systemic
                                          lupus erythematosus (SLE).
 What is the pathophysiology?            The underlying etiology of TTP is unknown but causes systemic
                                          endothelial cell damage. This results in platelet agglutination and the
                                          formation of hyaline thrombi in terminal arterioles and capillaries,
                                          which shear passing RBCs and cause the hemolytic anemia. Despite
                                          their thrombocytopenia, patients with TTP do not exhibit the
                                          coagulation anomalies seen in patients with disseminated intravascular
                                          coagulation (DIC).
 What are the appropriate next           TTP is a hematologic emergency, and many patients will require
  steps in management?                    ICU admission. Early initiation of plasma exchange, with a goal of
                                          exchanging 150% of the plasma volume daily, has been shown to
                                          improve survival. This is continued for several days after remission
                                          (demonstrated by normalized platelet count, LDH level, and RBC
                                          appearance on peripheral smear). The average duration of plasma
                                          exchange is 5–14 days.
 What are the major risks of              Air embolus.
  plasma exchange?                         Citrate toxicity: causes hypocalcemia and metabolic alkalosis.
                                           Pulmonary edema.
                                           Transfusion reactions.

 What is the prognosis for patients      Mortality has improved with the widespread use of plasma exchange;
  with this condition?                    current survival rates are reported around 70%. Surprisingly, the degree
                                          of renal involvement does not predict mortality from TTP-HUS.

                                                                                                                  191
                         CASE 20                   A 20-year-old college student is brought to the emergency department by her boyfriend
                                                    following a seizure. The patient is still confused, but her boyfriend states that she was
                                                    complaining of abdominal pain when she woke up. They had attended a party the night
                                                    before, and the boyfriend believes she took some sort of pills in addition to drinking.
                                                    He also reports that she has been on a diet and that her eating has been very erratic. On
                                                    physical examination, she is confused but responsive. Vital signs include a temperature
                                                    of 37.8° C (100.1° F), heart rate of 115/min, and blood pressure of 110/75 mm Hg. Her
                                                    abdomen is soft, but she groans on palpation. Neurologic exam is normal except for
                                                    global areﬂexia. A Foley catheter is inserted and returns 200 cc of dark reddish-brown
                                                    urine. Her urinary excretion of aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG)
                                                    is markedly elevated.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?       Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP). This is an autosomal dominant
                                                                   condition that, like all the porphyrias, involves a defect in heme
                                                                   production leading to an accumulation of porphyrins, speciﬁcally ALA
                                                                   and PBG in AIP.

                         What are the two broad categories        Photocutaneous porphyrias: Acute attacks are precipitated by UV
                          of symptoms in these conditions?         light; primary exam ﬁndings include skin blisters and photosensitivity.
                                                                   Neurovisceral porphyrias: Presents with visceral complaints, primarily
                                                                   a colicky abdominal pain, and neurologic abnormalities such as

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                   seizures.
                         What tests could be used to              Elevated porphyrin levels can be detected in blood, urine, and stool
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    samples; the speciﬁc porphyrins present depends on the type of
                                                                   porphyria. Enzyme assays to identify speciﬁc diseases can be helpful.
                                                                   For AIP, the activity of erythrocyte PBG deaminase will be reduced
                                                                   compared to normal controls.
                         What is the most appropriate             She is suffering an acute attack of a neurovisceral porphyria, likely
                          treatment for this condition?            triggered by her poor eating and use of alcohol and barbiturates. She
                                                                   should be treated with high doses of IV glucose or IV hematin; both
                                                                   of these inhibit the production of the toxic intermediates of the heme
                                                                   pathway responsible for her symptoms. In general, patients with a
                                                                   neurovisceral attack must immediately stop all medications or other
                                                                   substances that may have precipitated the attack and must receive
                                                                   treatment for possible infections or illnesses. Patients should also
                                                                   receive analgesia and/or sedation as needed.
                         What is the most appropriate             The focus in these diseases is on prevention through liberal use of
                          treatment for photocutaneous             sunscreen and protective clothing. When therapy is needed for an
                          porphyria?                               attack, oral activated charcoal or cholestyramine can absorb porphyrins
                                                                   and increase excretion in the stool; similarly, chloroquine forms
                                                                   a water-soluble complex with uroporphyrin to increase its urinary
                                                                   excretion. Phlebotomy to reduce body iron stores can also induce
                                                                   clinical remission.

                        192
 CASE 21                     A 58-year-old man presents to his primary physician with complaints of back pain
                              and problems urinating. His past medical history is signiﬁcant for a cadaveric kidney
                              transplant 2 months ago. The surgery was successful, and he did not experience any
                              immediate postoperative complications. For the past week, he has been having right
                              lower back pain and malaise. He has noticed a signiﬁcant decrease in his need to
                              urinate as well as the volume of urine he can produce. He denies any burning on
                              urination. On further questioning, he admits he has not been taking his medications
                              regularly; he estimates he remembers to take his medications three to four times per
                              week. Upon examination, he has a temperature of 38.3° C (101.0° F), blood pressure
                              of 160/98 mm Hg, heart rate of 83/min, and respiratory rate of 18/min. His back is very
                              tender, particularly over the right lumbar paraspinal region. When asked to provide a
                              urine sample, the patient returns with only 20 mL of urine. Relevant laboratory results
                              are as follows:
                              WBC count: 20,000/mm3
                              Serum Na+: 135 mEq/L
                              Serum K+: 3.2 mEq/L
                              Blood urea nitrogen: 47 mg/dL
                              Serum creatinine: 3.4 mg/dL
                              Serum glucose: 115 mg/dL

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Acute transplant rejection. Acute rejection typically occurs between 5

                                                                                                                        H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                            days and 3 months after the transplant. Patients can present with fever,
                                            pain, lethargy, and organ dysfunction, as demonstrated by the serum
                                            chemistries of the patient above.

 What is the pathogenesis of this          The mechanism of acute rejection is based on the action of cytotoxic
  condition?                                T cells against foreign major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs).
                                            The primary function of MHCs is to present antigens to cytotoxic
                                            and helper T cells. However, they are also potent markers of “self”
                                            within the body and must be matched as effectively as possible when a
                                            transplant organ is selected.
 How could this condition be               The use of a living donor tends to reduce the risk of acute rejection.
  avoided more effectively?                 Improved compliance with the immunosuppressive regimen could
                                            also have prevented this complication. Patient noncompliance may be
                                            due to an inability to tolerate the side effects of the immunosuppressive
                                            agents; choosing medications that better suit a patient’s lifestyle helps
                                            ensure greater compliance and more successful maintenance.
 What tests and/or imaging studies         Tests of organ function can be suggestive of the diagnosis; in this
  could be used to conﬁrm the               patient, his renal function is clearly compromised, as seen by his
  diagnosis?                                elevated BUN and creatinine levels. A biopsy of the transplanted organ
                                            typically will reveal T cell and antibody-induced reactions with graft
                                            tissue injury. A renal ultrasound will likely demonstrate enlargement of
                                            the organ, as well as focal swelling and hypogenicity of the medullary
                                            pyramids. Ruling out other causes of acute renal failure in this
                                            population, such as calcineurin toxicity, BK virus infection, volume
                                            depletion, and ureteric obstruction is important.
 What is the most appropriate              Patients gain relief from acute rejection symptoms via treatment
  treatment for this condition?             with steroids and antilymphocyte antibodies. However, for long-term
                                            management, it is important that the patient adhere carefully to his
                                            regimen of immunosuppressive medications.

                                                                                                                  193
                         CASE 22                   An 18-year-old African-American woman presents to a gynecologist for her ﬁrst visit.
                                                    She is in generally good health but complains of menorrhagia since menarche. She
                                                    notes that she bleeds profusely from cuts but that she can stop the bleeding with
                                                    prolonged pressure. Her mother has the same problem, but her two brothers and
                                                    her father seem to clot more quickly. Her maternal uncle died in a car accident as a
                                                    teenager and was rumored to be a hemophiliac; two of her maternal aunts also have
                                                    menorrhagia, but neither they nor her mother have had problems getting pregnant or
                                                    any complications during pregnancy and delivery. The patient’s prothrombin time is 13
                                                    seconds, and her partial thromboplastin time is 62 seconds.

                         What is the most likely diagnosis?      von Willebrand’s disease. This is the most common inherited
                                                                  coagulopathy and consists of a variety of disorders that produce
                                                                  abnormal forms of von Willebrand factor (vWF). There are many
                                                                  versions of dysfunctional vWF, but they can be classiﬁed into three
                                                                  groups with increasing disease severity. The classical form (type I,
                                                                  a quantitative defect) is autosomal dominant; more severe forms
                                                                  (type III) undergo autosomal recessive transmission. Type II vWD is
                                                                  composed of many different qualitative functional defects in the vWF
                                                                  protein. Patients typically present with easy bruising, gingival bleeding,
                                                                  epistaxis (bleeding from the nose and nasopharynx), menorrhagia in
                                                                  women, and bleeding out of proportion to trauma. Von Willebrand’s

H E MATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
                                                                  disease must be distinguished from other coagulopathies, but
                                                                  particularly from hemophilia (i.e., type II Normandy); deﬁciency of
                                                                  factor VIII with normal vWF levels indicates the latter.

                         What is the pathogenesis of this        vWF is synthesized by endothelial cells and megakaryocytes. It is a
                          condition?                              cofactor for platelet adhesion as well as the carrier for clotting factor
                                                                  VIII. Factor VIII, which is deﬁcient in hemophilia A, is a critical
                                                                  component of the clotting cascade. Deﬁciencies in vWF limit the
                                                                  body’s ability to carry factor VIII and therefore lead to prolonged
                                                                  bleeding and excessive bleeding secondary to minor trauma.
                         What tests could be used to             Patients with von Willebrand’s disease generally have prolonged
                          conﬁrm the diagnosis?                   partial thromboplastin times (PTTs), low to normal vWF antigen,
                                                                  and decreased vWF activity. Factor VIII levels and prothrombin times
                                                                  (PTs) may not be abnormal, which is why the disease often resembles
                                                                  mild hemophilia A. Ristocetin cofactor assay activity (which stimulates
                                                                  platelets through vWF) is typically low. von Willebrand multimer
                                                                  electrophoresis may help differentiate the type of vWD. Patients with
                                                                  type O blood often have vWF levels that are one-third lower than
                                                                  patients with other blood types. Platelet counts may be low in type II
                                                                  vWD (Ha).
                         What is the most appropriate            Desmopressin temporarily increases vWF levels by stimulating its
                          treatment for this condition?           release from endothelial cells and concomitantly stabilizes vascular
                                                                  endothelium. However, it can only be given for 2–3 days before
                                                                  endothelial depletion occurs and the therapeutic effect is lost. Patients
                                                                  with severe forms of the disease may beneﬁt from plasma factor VIII
                                                                  replacement, which contains vWF.
                         What is the prognosis for patients      This bleeding disorder is much milder than hemophilia. Even for more
                          with this condition?                    serious forms of von Willebrand’s disease, factor replacement is often
                                                                  highly effective. Overall, the prognosis for these patients is good.

                        194
Infectious Disease

Case 1               196

Case 2               197

Case 3               198

Case 4               200

Case 5               201

Case 6               202

Case 7               204

Case 8               206

Case 9               208

Case 10              209

Case 11              210

Case 12              212

Case 13              214

Case 14              215

Case 15              216

Case 16              217

Case 17              218

                           195
                        CASE 1                    A 22-year-old HIV-positive woman who emigrated from Botswana 2 months ago
                                                   presents to the emergency department complaining of worsening shortness of
                                                   breath and fatigue. She contracted HIV 5 years ago and was started on highly active
                                                   antiretroviral therapy (HAART) 3 weeks before leaving Botswana. She states that she has
                                                   been very adherent with her HAART regimen of zidovudine (AZT), lamivudine (3TC),
                                                   and abacavir and has not missed even one dose. Her CD4 count prior to initiating
                                                   treatment was 250/mm3. On physical examination, the patient has a temperature of
                                                   36.6° C (98.5° F), heart rate of 116/min, blood pressure of 110/68 mm Hg, respiratory
                                                   rate of 26/min, and percutaneous oxygen saturation level of 97% on room air. Her
                                                   conjunctivae are noticeably pale, and her capillary reﬁll time is delayed.

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?      AZT-induced anemia. AZT can cause bone marrow suppression and
                                                                 subsequent anemia, usually within several weeks of initiating therapy.
                                                                 Given this patient’s history of HIV with a low CD4 count, her anemia
                                                                 could certainly be secondary to HIV-related bone marrow suppression
                                                                 or to an opportunistic infection within the bone marrow. As AZT is the
                                                                 most likely culprit and the easiest to treat, it is prudent to discontinue
                                                                 the AZT and start this patient on a new regimen. If the patient does not
                                                                 improve, further investigation is necessary.

                        What is the mechanism of action         Zidovudine is a synthetic thymidine analog that is part of the larger
                         of zidovudine?                          class of nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Reverse transcriptase
                                                                 is an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase that converts viral RNA into

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                 proviral DNA that is then incorporated into the host cell chromosome.
                                                                 Like all available antiretrovirals, nucleoside and nucleotide reverse
                                                                 transcriptase inhibitors prevent infection of susceptible cells but have
                                                                 no impact on cells already harboring HIV. Nucleoside and nucleotide
                                                                 analogs act as substrates for the reverse transcriptase enzyme, thus
                                                                 blocking its ability to bind viral RNA and generate proviral DNA.
                        What are other common adverse           Patients initiating AZT treatment often complain of fatigue, malaise,
                         effects of zidovudine?                  myalgia, nausea, anorexia, headache, and insomnia. These symptoms
                                                                 usually resolve within the ﬁrst few weeks of treatment and are generally
                                                                 not cause for a change in drug regimen. More severe adverse effects
                                                                 include peripheral neuropathy, hyperuricemia, neutropenia, myositis,
                                                                 and liver toxicity. Lactic acidosis, with or without hepatomegaly and
                                                                 hepatic steatosis, may also be seen with AZT.
                        What is the pathogenesis of this        AZT causes anemia and often granulocytopenia through bone marrow
                         condition?                              suppression. This adverse effect most often occurs within the ﬁrst 4
                                                                 weeks of treatment in individuals with advanced HIV and low CD4
                                                                 counts. It is more common when given in higher doses and is often the
                                                                 dose-limiting adverse effect. The anemia can be exacerbated by other
                                                                 drugs that also cause bone marrow suppression, such as ganciclovir.
                        What is the most appropriate            In the immediate setting, patients with hemoglobin levels < 7 g/dL
                         treatment for this condition?           should receive transfusion with packed RBCs; two or more units may
                                                                 be required. Long-term management would include switching to an
                                                                 alternative HAART regimen.

                       196
 CASE 2                     A 10-day-old infant is brought by his mother to the pediatrician’s ofﬁce due to purulent
                             discharge from the infant’s right eye. The infant was born via spontaneous vaginal
                             delivery without complications 30 minutes after the mother’s arrival at the hospital.
                             He had Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. The mother received
                             no prenatal care during her pregnancy. On physical examination, the patient has a
                             temperature of 38.3° C (100.9° F). His right eye is notably erythematous and draining
                             purulent material. The left eye is currently unaffected.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Ophthalmia neonatorum (conjunctivitis occurring within the
                                            ﬁrst month of life), most likely caused by Chlamydia trachomatis.
                                            Occurring within 5–12 days postdelivery, this is the most common
                                            cause of infectious conjunctivitis in the neonate and is a common
                                            cause of preventable blindness in developing countries. In actively
                                            infected mothers, there is a 30–50% vertical transmission rate
                                            during vaginal delivery. Neisseria gonorrhoeae causes a more rapidly
                                            destructive form of infectious conjunctivitis, usually presenting 3–5
                                            days postpartum. It can progress to ulceration or perforation in 24
                                            hours if untreated.

 What are other conditions caused          In addition to urethritis/pelvic inﬂammatory disease, C. trachomatis is
  by this pathogen?                         an infrequent cause of endocarditis, peritonitis, pleuritis, and possibly
                                            periappendicitis and may occasionally cause respiratory infections in
                                            older children and adults.

                                                                                                                         I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
 What are the other species of this        Chlamydophila psittaci (formerly Chlamydia psittaci) causes genital,
  pathogen and what infections do           conjunctival, intestinal, or respiratory infections in many mammalian
  they typically cause?                     and avian species. Although mammalian strains of C. psittaci are
                                            not known to infect humans, avian strains can cross-infect and
                                            cause pneumonia and the systemic illness known as psittacosis.
                                            Chlamydophila pneumoniae (formerly Chlamydia pneumoniae) is a
                                            common cause of upper respiratory tract infections and pneumonia,
                                            primarily affecting children, young adults, and the elderly or
                                            immunocompromised. Some studies have also linked C. pneumoniae
                                            infection to atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and possibly to some
                                            asthmas and sarcoidosis as well.
 What is the reproductive cycle of         All Chlamydia species have a complex reproductive cycle involving
  this pathogen?                            the extracellular elementary body and the intracellular reticulate
                                            body. Adapted for extracellular survival, the elementary body is the
                                            infective form that is transmitted between hosts. Elementary bodies
                                            attach to target cells (usually columnar or transitional epithelial cells)
                                            and enter the cells via a phagosome. The elementary bodies reorganize
                                            into reticulate bodies, which replicate via binary ﬁssion within the
                                            membrane-bound “inclusion body.” These inclusions resist lysosomal
                                            fusion, protecting them from host cell defenses. Within a day, the
                                            reticulate bodies condense into elementary bodies, which are then
                                            released when the inclusion body ruptures.
 What antibiotics are effective            Chlamydial species are obligate intracellular bacteria that possess both
  against this pathogen?                    DNA and RNA and have a cell wall and ribosomes similar to those
                                            of gram-negative bacteria. Tetracyclines (targeting the 30S ribosome)
                                            and macrolides (targeting the 50S ribosome) are effective in treating
                                            chlamydial infections.

                                                                                                                  197
                        CASE 3                     A 21-year-old woman presents to the emergency department because of progressively
                                                    worsening left wrist pain and malaise over the past 36 hours. The night before
                                                    admission she developed a fever and loss of appetite. She also developed pain in her
                                                    palms bilaterally. She denies any history of trauma or unusual physical activity. She does
                                                    not have any nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or hematochezia. On examination, she has a
                                                    temperature of 38.7° C (101.7° F), heart rate of 85/min, respiratory rate of 16/min, and
                                                    blood pressure of 110/80 mm Hg. The examination is notable for swelling, warmth,
                                                    and erythema of her left wrist. The wrist joint is extremely tender to palpation. Skin
                                                    examination is notable for several tender bilateral palmar violaceous pustular eruptions.
                                                    She is a college student and lives in a sorority house on campus. She drinks and smokes
                                                    socially and is sexually active with more than one partner.

                        What should be included in                The three main diagnoses to consider in a patient who presents with
                         the differential diagnosis of             acute monarticular symptoms are trauma, infection, and crystalline
                         monarticular arthritis?                   disease (gout and pseudogout). Tick-borne arthopathies and certain
                                                                   systemic disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
                                                                   seronegative spondyloarthropathies, and rheumatoid arthritis, are also
                                                                   commonly considered in the differential diagnosis.

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?        Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) is the most common cause
                                                                   of acute nontraumatic monarthritis or oligoarthritis in young adults.
                                                                   Patients with DGI typically present with one of two syndromes:
                                                                    A triad of tenosynovitis, vesiculopustular skin lesions, and

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                     polyarthralgias without purulent arthritis.
                                                                    Purulent arthritis without associated skin lesions.

                        What risk factors are associated          DGI occurs in 1–3% of patients infected with Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
                         with an increased incidence of            Both host and microbial factors play important roles in the potential
                         this condition?                           for gonorrhea to disseminate. Host factors include female gender (three
                                                                   times more than males), pregnancy, menstrual period, complement
                                                                   deﬁciencies, and SLE.
                        What laboratory tests could be             Synovial ﬂuid analysis.
                         used to conﬁrm the diagnosis?              At least two sets of blood cultures.
                                                                    Synovial, skin, urethral or cervical cultures, throat, and rectal
                                                                     cultures submitted on Thayer-Martin medium. If associated urethritis
                                                                     is simultaneously present, a Gram stain of the urethral exudate
                                                                     should be obtained and examined for the presence of the gram-
                                                                     negative diplococci characteristic of N. gonorrhoeae infection.
                                                                    Test for HIV infection, Chlamydia trachomatis, and syphilis serology
                                                                     since coexistent infection with other sexually transmitted diseases is
                                                                     common. In women, a pregnancy test should also be performed.
                        What is the most appropriate              The initial therapy of choice is ceftriaxone (1 g either IV or IM) every
                         treatment for this condition?             24 hours. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines
                                                                   suggest a minimum treatment course of 7 days for DGI with a
                                                                   switch to oral therapy 24–48 hours after improvement is noted. For
                                                                   a nondisseminated case, a single dose of 125 mg ceftriaxone IM is
                                                                   sufﬁcient. Patients with purulent arthritis require joint drainage.
                                                                   Patients should be empirically treated for chlamydial coinfection, since
                                                                   these two infections often coexist. Common regimens for chlamydial
                                                                   infection include azithromycin and doxycycline.

                       198
 The patient is treated and sent      Her symptoms are most likely a result of pelvic inﬂammatory disease
  home. She continues to have          (PID) caused by N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis infection. PID is
  unprotected sex. Three months        an acute infection of the upper genital tract structures in women,
  later she returns complaining        involving any or all of the uterus, oviducts, and ovaries. Untreated
  of lower abdominal pain, fever,      PID can lead to serious consequences including infertility, ectopic
  foul-smelling vaginal discharge,     pregnancy, abscess formation, and chronic pelvic pain.
  and pain during intercourse and
  urination. What is the most likely
  diagnosis?

                                                                                                               I N FECTIOUS DISEASE

                                                                                                         199
                        CASE 4                     A 45-year-old woman from Cincinnati presents to her physician complaining of cough,
                                                    dyspnea, fevers, and weight loss. She has been HIV positive for 20 years and has
                                                    been using highly active antiretroviral therapy for the past decade. While previously
                                                    adherent to her regimen, she has lost her health insurance and hasn’t seen her regular
                                                    physician. Her temperature is 39° C (102.2° F), heart rate is 90/min, and respiratory
                                                    rate is 20/min. Physical exam is signiﬁcant for diffuse rales, hepatosplenomegaly, and
                                                    lymphadenopathy. X-ray of the chest reveals reticulonodular inﬁltrates with a few
                                                    calciﬁed granulomas. Laboratory studies are as follows:
                                                    CBC: Hemoglobin: 10.0 g/dL
                                                    WBC count: 4000/mm³
                                                    Platelet count: 50,000/mm³
                                                    CD4 count: 100/mm³

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?       Disseminated endemic fungal infection, likely histoplasmosis. The
                                                                  endemic fungi are soil-based fungi seen in particular geographic areas
                                                                  and include histoplasmosis and blastomycosis (Ohio and Mississippi
                                                                  River valleys), coccidioidomycosis (southwestern United States), and
                                                                  paracoccidioidomycosis (Latin America). In endemic areas, these
                                                                  fungi commonly cause asymptomatic infection in healthy patients. In
                                                                  patients with a large inoculum, an acute pulmonary infection is seen.
                                                                  Patients with underlying lung disease can develop chronic cavitary
                                                                  disease, which resembles tuberculosis. In immunocompromised

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                  patients, especially those with AIDS, disseminated disease can be life
                                                                  threatening.

                        What conditions should be                The differential diagnosis of a febrile respiratory illness with
                         included in the differential             lymphadenopathy in a patient with AIDS includes Pneumocystis
                         diagnosis?                               pneumonia, the Mycobacterium avium complex, disseminated
                                                                  cytomegalovirus, disseminated crytpococcus, lymphoma, or miliary
                                                                  tuberculosis. In acute pulmonary cases in patients without AIDS, the
                                                                  differential list also includes sarcoidosis, which can have a very similar
                                                                  clinical presentation.
                        What is the pathogenesis of this         The endemic mycoses are dimorphic fungi that live in the soil. When
                         condition?                               the spores are aerosolized and inhaled, they revert to fungal forms and
                                                                  incite a T-cell response that usually clears the infection within 2 weeks.
                                                                  Immunocompromised patients can either develop disseminated disease
                                                                  immediately or as a reactivation of latent infection. Disseminated
                                                                  disease can demonstrate gastrointestinal involvement with ulcerations,
                                                                  polyp development, or obstruction, skin lesions, adrenal involvement,
                                                                  and central nervous system disease.
                        What tests could be used to              Rapid antigen detection tests can identify the Histoplasma
                         conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    polysaccharide antigen in urine, blood, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, or
                                                                  bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid. Direct visualization and culture of the
                                                                  fungus can be done with blood or tissue samples, although culture may
                                                                  take weeks.
                        What is the most appropriate             The current recommendation for disseminated histoplasmosis
                         treatment for this condition?            in patients with AIDS is liposomal amphotericin B, followed by
                                                                  itraconazole suppressive therapy for life. The majority of acute
                                                                  pulmonary histoplasmosis infections in immunocompetent patients do
                                                                  not require treatment.

                       200
 CASE 5                     A 17-year-old girl presents to her pediatrician with fatigue and a sore throat of several
                             weeks’ duration. She says that she is still able to attend classes at her high school but
                             falls asleep as soon as she gets home. She has never had anything like this before
                             but notes that several of her good friends have missed school recently. On physical
                             examination, her vital signs include a temperature of 39.1° C (102.4° F), heart rate of
                             76/min, blood pressure of 110/75 mm Hg, and respiratory rate of 12/min. Her throat
                             is markedly erythematous with occasional exudates on the tonsils. She has tender
                             posterior cervical lymphadenopathy bilaterally and mild hepatosplenomegaly. The
                             remainder of her exam is within normal limits. A peripheral blood smear reveals
                             atypical lymphocytosis.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Infectious mononucleosis (mono). This is an acute infection with
                                            Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) typically seen in teenagers and young
                                            adults. Patients present with the triad of fever, sore throat, and
                                            lymphadenopathy. Fatigue frequently accompanies the initial illness
                                            and may persist for 3–6 months.

 What is the pathogenesis of this          EBV is transmitted in bodily ﬂuids, including saliva, and replicates
  condition?                                in oropharyngeal epithelial cells before infecting B cells, which
                                            disseminate systemically through the lymphoreticular system. While B
                                            cells are infected in mono, the atypical lymphocytes seen on peripheral
                                            smear are actually T lymphocytes, which help control the infection.

                                                                                                                           I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
 What tests could be used to               The Monospot, or heterophile antibody test, is the ﬁrst test ordered
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                     in a patient with suspected mono. EBV-infected B cells produce
                                            antibodies that agglutinate horse and sheep blood samples; however,
                                            these antibodies may not be produced until the patient has been
                                            symptomatic for a few weeks. If the monospot is negative but clinical
                                            suspicion is high, antibody tests against viral capsid antigen or EBV
                                            nuclear antigen should be ordered. Clinical disease with negative
                                            monospot and antibody tests is likely due to cytomegalovirus (CMV)
                                            infection or acute HIV seroconversion syndrome (primary HIV
                                            disease).
 What is the most appropriate              There is no effective antiviral therapy for mono, so treatment is mainly
  treatment for this condition?             supportive. Steroids are indicated in case of tonsillar enlargement that
                                            threatens the patient’s airway, severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
                                            or signiﬁcant thrombocytopenia.
 What are the potential                     CNS infection
  complications of this condition?           Splenic rupture
                                             Upper airway obstruction
                                             Bacterial superinfection
                                             Fulminant hepatic necrosis
                                             Autoimmune hemolytic anemia

 The patient is misdiagnosed with          Patients with mono who receive β-lactam antibiotics frequently develop
  streptococcal pharyngitis and             a prolonged, pruritic drug rash. The rash resolves with discontinuation
  treated with ampicillin. What             of the drug and does not indicate future sensitivity or allergy to the class
  adverse event is associated with          of antibiotics.
  this treatment?

                                                                                                                    201
                        CASE 6                     A 42-year-old woman presents to her physician with an erythematous annular patch
                                                    with central clearing on her left forearm. The patient states that the rash began as
                                                    a small red papule about 5 days ago and has grown progressively larger. She also
                                                    complains of fatigue, headache, myalgias, and intermittent arthralgias that have
                                                    lasted 2 weeks. She has remained afebrile, and her vital signs are stable. Physical
                                                    examination is signiﬁcant for a 9 × 9-cm erythematous patch on her left forearm that
                                                    has concentric rings of redness and a clearing center. She also has cervical and axillary
                                                    lymphadenopathy. The remainder of the examination is unremarkable. She has no
                                                    recent travel history, no sick contacts, and keeps several dogs for hunting in the woods
                                                    near her Connecticut home.

                        What is the most likely cause of         The most likely cause of an erythematous annular rash with red
                         her rash?                                expanding borders and central clearing is erythema migrans, caused by
                                                                  the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. The tick must be imbedded for 2–3
                                                                  days for infection to be transmitted because borrelia replication begins
                                                                  only after the tick has started to feed. Lyme disease is most often seen in
                                                                  the northeastern United States.

                        What else should be considered           In the southern United States, a similar syndrome called STARI
                         in the differential diagnosis?           (southern tick-associated rashlike illness) has been described, though
                                                                  the causative organism has not been isolated. Other causes to consider
                                                                  include tinea, erysipelas, cellulitis, nummular eczema, and insect bites.

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                        What is the most likely diagnosis?       Lyme disease, a multisystem inﬂammatory disease caused by
                                                                  spirochetes, must be considered in a patient from an endemic area with
                                                                  a classic “bull’s-eye” rash of erythema migrans in combination with
                                                                  constitutional symptoms.
                        What is the most appropriate             Doxycycline, amoxicillin, and cefuroxime axetil, given for
                         immeadiate treatment for this            approximately 2–3 weeks, are all effective for the treatment of early
                         condition?                               Lyme disease. When given in a timely fashion, these oral antibiotics
                                                                  prevent progression to later features of disease, although treatment may
                                                                  not decrease the duration or severity of the symptoms of early disease.
                        How can the diagnosis of this            The diagnosis of early Lyme disease is clinical because the sensitivity
                         condition be conﬁrmed?                   of serologic testing is approximately 50% in early disease (and increases
                                                                  to over 90% by the later stages). The fact that the patient lives near
                                                                  a wooded area in an endemic area, and the history that the rash
                                                                  expanded over several days and surpassed 5 cm in diameter, are useful
                                                                  clues. Diagnosis of Lyme disease is aided by serologic testing in later
                                                                  disease, which should include antibody testing by enzyme-linked
                                                                  immunosorbent assay (ELISA). If positive, follow-up with Western
                                                                  blot testing for both immunoglobulin G and M antibodies is required
                                                                  to determine a deﬁnitive diagnosis. By weeks 6–8 of infection, most
                                                                  patients will have an appropriate antibody response.

                       202
 The patient’s husband presents      This patient has Bell’s palsy, most likely caused by disseminated B.
  to the physician 6 months later     burgdorferi. Presentation of disseminated disease can occur days to
  complaining of left-sided facial    months after the tick bite. Symptoms include carditis, migratory
  palsy. What is the most likely      arthralgias, CNS involvement including meningitis and cranial nerve
  diagnosis and what is the most      palsies. IV antibiotic therapy is indicated for early neurologic disease
  appropriate treatment?              with one exception: isolated facial palsy (of cranial nerve VII) can
                                      be treated with oral antibiotics if the CSF reveals no inﬂammatory
                                      changes and there are no other objective neurologic ﬁndings.
 What other symptoms could           Late Lyme disease occurs months to years after initial infection.
  this patient expect to develop      Arthralgias are most common, but neurologic manifestations
  over time if the condition is not   (encephalopathy, neurocognitive dysfunction, peripheral neuropathy)
  treated?                            and nonspeciﬁc symptoms (headache, fatigue) also occur.

                                                                                                                  I N FECTIOUS DISEASE

                                                                                                            203
                        CASE 7                     A 6-year-old boy presents to his pediatrician with high fevers, chills, and sweats that
                                                    he has experienced since returning from a family trip to India. His parents say he has
                                                    had no energy since their return, has complained of stomach and muscle aches, and
                                                    has been unable to tolerate any food. He did not receive any prophylactic medications
                                                    during their trip. On physical examination, he is clinging to his mother and appears
                                                    uncomfortable. Vital signs include a temperature of 40.1° C (104.1° F), heart rate of
                                                    157/min, blood pressure of 88/65 mm Hg, and respiratory rate of 16/min. His abdomen
                                                    is soft with marked splenomegaly. There is no lymphadenopathy, nuchal rigidity, or
                                                    rash.

                        What conditions should be                 Malaria
                         included in the differential              Typhoid fever
                         diagnosis?                                Viral gastroenteritis
                                                                   Dengue fever
                                                                   Inﬂuenza

                        What is the most likely diagnosis,       Malaria. This is a hematologic infection with one of four species
                         and how can it be conﬁrmed?              of Plasmodium (P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale, or P. malariae).
                                                                  Characteristic symptoms include a cyclic fever with chills and
                                                                  diaphoresis lasting 4–6 hours and recurring every 2–3 days, depending
                                                                  on the species; early in infection, however, fevers are generally
                                                                  continuous. Thick and thin blood ﬁlms should be obtained at intervals
                                                                  to identify the strain of Plasmodium. More sensitive tests, including

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                  ﬂuorescent antibody methods and polymerase chain reaction, are also
                                                                  available.
                        What is the epidemiology of this         There are 300–500 million cases of malaria annually worldwide,
                         condition?                               causing up to 2.7 million deaths, especially in children. Plasmodium
                                                                  is endemic in Oceania, sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, and South
                                                                  America; infection should be suspected in patients from those areas.
                        What is the pathogenesis of this         Malaria is transmitted primarily via the bite of a female Anopheles
                         condition?                               mosquito. Sporozoites travel through the blood stream to the liver,
                                                                  where they infect hepatocytes and replicate, forming a liver schizont.
                                                                  The liver schizont ruptures and releases thousands of merozoites,
                                                                  which infect red blood cells; in P. vivax and P. ovale infections, some
                                                                  parasites remain dormant in the liver and can reactivate to cause late
                                                                  relapses months to years later. Parasite development completes in the
                                                                  red blood cell, forming a red cell schizont. Rupture of the red blood
                                                                  cells causes the characteristic fever spike after 48–72 hours. Parasite
                                                                  metabolism within the red blood cell can cause anemia, hypoglycemia,
                                                                  and lactic acidosis.
                        What is the most appropriate             Uncomplicated malaria infections can be treated with oral
                         treatment for this condition?            medications. Knowledge of the area of travel and medication resistance
                                                                  patterns is necessary to choose the appropriate regimen. Chloroquine
                                                                  has been the standard treatment but has increasingly been replaced
                                                                  with alternative medicines like quinine, atovaquone, and meﬂoquine
                                                                  or combinations such as proguanil/atovaquone (Malarone). Severe
                                                                  infections should be treated with parenteral medications administered
                                                                  in the hospital setting.

                       204
 What is the appropriate            Those with plans to travel to endemic areas should take appropriate
  prophylaxis for this condition?    precautions. Preventing mosquito bites through the use of DEET
                                     insect repellant, insecticide-treated bednets, window screens, and light-
                                     colored clothing is prudent. In addition, an antimalarial drug should
                                     be prescribed immediately prior to and during the trip to prevent
                                     infection.
 What are potential complications    Cerebral malaria
  of this infection?                  Severe hemolytic anemia
                                      Acute tubular necrosis with renal failure
                                      Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema

                                                                                                                 I N FECTIOUS DISEASE

                                                                                                          205
                        CASE 8                    A 4-year-old girl presents to her pediatrician with pain and swelling of her right
                                                   thigh. Her parents note that she has been playing outside frequently and suffered
                                                   a questionable spider bite several days ago. The child has had increasing pain and
                                                   discomfort since that time and now is not as active as usual. Over the last day, she has
                                                   not been eating well, has had a fever up to 38.6° C (101.4° F), and is fussy and irritable.
                                                   Her past medical history is signiﬁcant only for a prior soft tissue infection at 2 years of
                                                   age. Her mother thinks some of the other children at daycare may have had similar
                                                   skin infections. On physical examination, her temperature is 38.9°C (102.1° F), blood
                                                   pressure is 95/69 mm Hg, and heart rate is 115/min. The patient also has a 4 × 5-cm
                                                   ﬂuctuant mass on her medial right thigh with overlying erythema, which is obviously
                                                   painful to touch.

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?       Given the history of a prior skin infection, contacts with similar
                                                                  infections, and the prevalence of community-acquired methicillin-
                                                                  resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), one has to assume this is an
                                                                  MRSA abscess and treat it accordingly.

                        What is the most appropriate             The standard treatment for a ﬂuctuant mass (i.e., abscess) is incision
                         treatment for this condition?            and drainage (I&D) with subsequent culture, plus or minus additional
                                                                  antibiotic therapy. For an abscess smaller than 5 cm, an I&D alone
                                                                  should effectively treat the infection. While it is possible to perform
                                                                  the procedure under local anesthesia with or without sedation, many
                                                                  practitioners would consult general surgery to drain the abscess under

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                  general anesthesia. In this case, the patient also has systemic signs of
                                                                  infection (fever, tachycardia), so determining if a bloodstream infection
                                                                  is present by obtaining blood cultures should occur along with systemic
                                                                  anti-MRSA treatment. As an inpatient, the patient will receive IV
                                                                  vancomycin, followed by 7–10 days of clindamycin or trimethoprim-
                                                                  sulfamethoxazole for outpatient therapy. While less effective, a long-
                                                                  acting tetracycline (such as doxycycline) may be a reasonable choice
                                                                  for adults. It should be avoided in children because of deposition in
                                                                  bones and teeth. It should also be noted that clindamycin resistance is
                                                                  inducible in certain strains of MRSA that are erythromycin resistant, so
                                                                  knowledge of local susceptibility patterns is important prior to choosing
                                                                  antibiotic therapy.
                        How may future infections be             Recurrence rate is thought to be greater than 10%. Decolonization
                         prevented?                               techniques are becoming popular with pediatricians, though the
                                                                  efﬁcacy is unclear to date. Clorhexidine or bleach baths as well as
                                                                  intranasal mupirocin have been offered as potential decolonization
                                                                  strategies. The CDC recommends several measures to limit the spread
                                                                  of community-acquired MRSA including covering draining wounds
                                                                  with clean bandages, washing hands and clothes after contact with
                                                                  contaminated wound, avoidance of shared towels/clothes/athletic
                                                                  equipment that may become contaminated, and cleaning sports
                                                                  equipment with a disinfectant effective against staphylococci.

                       206
 What is the epidemiology of this   Methicillin-resistent Staphylococcus aureus refers to strains of
  infection?                         staphylococcus resistant to all β-lactams. Initially only a pathogen
                                     in health care settings, new strains of MRSA (community associated
                                     MRSA or CA-MRSA) have become a signiﬁcant source of disease
                                     burden in the community at large over the last decade. In most
                                     communities, a predominant strain of CA-MRSA called USA300
                                     has emerged, which usually expresses an exotoxin (Panton-Valentine
                                     leukocidin) associated with necrotizing pneumonia, abscess formation,
                                     and skin necrosis. A recent study found almost 10% of children to be
                                     asymptomatically colonized with MRSA.

                                                                                                             I N FECTIOUS DISEASE

                                                                                                      207
                        CASE 9                     A 58-year-old diabetic man presents to his primary care physician complaining of low-
                                                    grade fever and severe right leg pain. He had sustained a small laceration to his calf
                                                    while playing tennis with friends the day before. His pain began several hours after his
                                                    injury, with localized redness and swelling. The pain worsened to the point where he
                                                    had difﬁculty walking. On physical examination, he is ill-appearing and diaphoretic. His
                                                    temperature is 38.9°C (102.1°F), heart rate is 115/min, blood pressure is 98/60 mm Hg,
                                                    and respiratory rate is 29/min. On physical examination, his right leg is erythematous
                                                    with a bluish hue, cold, swollen, and very painful to palpation.

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?       Necrotizing fasciitis is an infection of the deep fascia. Infection initially
                                                                  begins in the epidermis but quickly spreads to the dermis, causing
                                                                  extensive thrombosis and subsequent necrosis of blood vessels in the
                                                                  dermal papillae. From there, it extends to the deep fascia, where it
                                                                  rapidly spreads along fascial planes through venous channels and
                                                                  lymphatics. Patients often appear toxic and may quickly progress to
                                                                  shock and multiorgan failure.

                        What are the most common                 Necrotizing fasciitis is most commonly associated with group A
                         causative pathogens of this              streptococci. The infection may also be polymicrobial and include
                         condition?                               aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. The presence of gas gangrene may
                                                                  suggest infection caused by Clostridium perfringens.
                        What is the pathogenesis of this         Infection usually begins after trauma (most often a seemingly minor

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                         condition?                               event) that results in a break in the skin (even unnoticed). The
                                                                  epidermal defect allows organisms access to the deeper structures,
                                                                  where proliferation results in rapid progression.
                        What risk factors are associated         Risk factors include conditions that compromise systemic blood ﬂow
                         with an increased incidence of           and wound healing, such as peripheral vascular disease and diabetes
                         this condition?                          mellitus. Conditions that cause a breach in skin, such as recent surgery
                                                                  or instrumentation or a penetrating injury, also predispose a patient to
                                                                  necrotizing fasciitis.
                        What is the most appropriate             All patients with suspected necrotizing fasciitis should receive
                         treatment for this condition?            empiric antibiotic coverage for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria
                                                                  immediately after obtaining blood cultures to isoate the offending
                                                                  organism. While many different antibiotic combinations are possible,
                                                                  penicillin combined with clindamycin is most effective for group
                                                                  A streptococcus. Other regimens include ampicillin/sulbactam,
                                                                  piperacillin/tazobactam, or imipenem/cilastatin all combined with
                                                                  clindamycin. The recent increase in recognized necrotizing fasciitis
                                                                  due to MRSA suggests that therapy targeted against this organisms
                                                                  should also be a component of the empirical regimen. To reduce
                                                                  morbidity and mortality, however, treatment with antibiotics must
                                                                  be paired with early and aggressive surgical exploration. Surgical
                                                                  intervention is necessary to visualize the deep tissue structures, remove
                                                                  necrotic tissue, reduce compartment pressure, and obtain suitable
                                                                  material for Gram’s staining and for aerobic and anaerobic cultures.
                        What laboratory value may                Serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels may be used to track
                         be used to mark response to              response to treatment. Initial values are markedly elevated due to
                         treatment?                               severe tissue and muscle injury. While initial levels of serum CPK
                                                                  may not correlate with the degree of initial infection, a rise or fall from
                                                                  the initial value can be used to track an inappropriate or appropriate
                                                                  response to treatment, respectively.

                       208
 CASE 10                    A 70-year-old woman who recently started chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia
                             presents to the emergency department with fever of 1 day’s duration. She is otherwise
                             asymptomatic. She has a temperature of 38.7° C (102° F), heart rate of 88/min,
                             respiratory rate of 12/min, and blood pressure of 110/80 mm Hg. Physical examination
                             is unremarkable. Her indwelling vascular catheter site is without erythema or
                             tenderness. A chest radiograph is normal. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings include a WBC
                             count of 1.2/mm3, hemoglobin of 11.4 g/dL, platelet count of 150,000/mm3, and an
                             absolute neutrophil count of 290/mL. RBC levels are within normal limits.

 What is the most appropriate             Fever in a neutropenic patient must be treated as a medical emergency,
  next step in management of this          and empiric therapy with antibiotics should be instituted immediately
  patient?                                 after obtaining cultures of the blood, urine, and sputum. The empiric
                                           antibiotics must be effective against gram-negative bacteria, particularly
                                           Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Common regimens include monotherapy
                                           with imipenem, meropenem, or a combination of a β lactam and an
                                           aminoglycoside (a synergistic combination).

 What laboratory tests should              CBC with differential.
  be included in the diagnosis of           Electrolytes.
  febrile neutropenic patients?             Liver function tests.
                                            Cultures of blood, urine, stool, and wound (if present).
                                            Radiograph of the chest.
                                            CT scan to rule out an abscess.

                                                                                                                        I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
 Blood cultures grow gram-positive        The blood culture result suggests infection with staphylococci. An
  cocci in clusters. What is the           antibiotic directed at gram-positive cocci should be started, even
  appropriate next step?                   without further identiﬁcation of the organism. Vancomycin is usually
                                           the drug of choice for gram-positive infections in neutropenic patients.
 When should the patient’s                Catheter removal is recommended for patients with catheter-related
  indwelling catheter be removed?          candidemia or bacteremia in which one of the following organisms is
                                           implicated: Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas species, rapid-growing
                                           atypical mycobacteria, Stenotrophomonas species, Bacillus species, or
                                           Corynebacterium jeikeium.
 Despite appropriate management,          The incidence of fungal infection (especially Candida species or
  the fever persists for the next 5        Aspergillus species) rises after patients have experienced > 7 days
  days. The patient remains stable,        of persistent fever and neutropenia. Antifungal therapy is routinely
  and further cultures are negative.       added after 5–7 days of persistent fever in a neutopenic patient when
  What is the appropriate next step?       reassessment does not yield a cause. Amphotericin B is most commonly
                                           used, but less toxic drugs such as voriconazole, caspofungin, and
                                           itraconazole are gaining popularity.
 What other therapy should be             In acute myeloid leukemia, primary administration of a colony-
  considered for this patient?             stimulating factor is recommended after completion of induction
                                           chemotherapy to shorten the duration of neutropenia. Several
                                           prospective randomized controlled trials have evaluated the efﬁcacy of
                                           hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors as treatment for neutropenic
                                           fever. While some provided evidence of minor clinical beneﬁt,
                                           including shorter duration of neutropenia (ANC < 500/μL) and
                                           hospitalization, decreased mortality rates have not consistently been
                                           seen.

                                                                                                                209
                        CASE 11                      A 9-year-old boy presents to his pediatrician with right leg pain and intermittent fever
                                                      of 5 days’ duration. He complains of pain in his right leg that has gotten progressively
                                                      worse, and he has been having an increasingly difﬁcult time walking over the past
                                                      2 days. He fell off of his skateboard 7 days ago but has no other history of trauma. He
                                                      has no previous medical problems. He denies recent weight loss, cough, diarrhea, or
                                                      dysuria. On examination, his temperature is 39.4° C (102.9° F), heart rate is 110/min,
                                                      respiratory rate is 16/min, and blood pressure is 95/50 mm Hg. He is alert and well
                                                      appearing. Physical examination is signiﬁcant for edema, warmth, and tenderness over
                                                      his right proximal tibia. The remainder of his examination is unremarkable.

                        What conditions should be                   The differential diagnosis of a child who presents with fever, bone pain,
                         included in the differential                and tenderness includes bone infarction due to sickle cell disease,
                         diagnosis?                                  cellulitis, Ewing’s sarcoma, leukemia, neuroblastoma, osteomyelitis,
                                                                     osteosarcoma, rheumatic fever, septic arthritis, thrombophlebitis, toxic
                                                                     synovitis.

                        What laboratory tests should be             The most useful laboratory values are the acute phase reactants,
                         ordered for this patient?                   erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP),
                                                                     which can identify acute inﬂammatory processes. The value for ESR
                                                                     usually starts to increase about 48–72 hours into an infectious process.
                                                                     The CRP rises earlier than the ESR, about 6–10 hours after the onset
                                                                     of inﬂammation. A complete blood count can be useful in detecting
                                                                     an elevated WBC or signs of leukemia. Blood cultures can identify the

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                     causative organism in 30–50% of cases.
                        A radiograph of the right                   Acute osteomyelitis. MRI is now the most sensitive modality for
                         tibia is normal. MRI shows a                detecting changes in bone consistent with acute osteomyelitis. Bone
                         hyperintense signal in the marrow           marrow edema is seen as low signal intensity (dark) on Tl-weighted
                         with a small ﬂuid-ﬁlled pocket              images and high signal intensity (bright) on T2-weighted images.
                         elevating the periosteum, as well           These changes are not speciﬁc, so ﬁndings must be interpreted within
                         as soft tissue swelling of the right        the clinical context.
                         proximal tibia. What is the most
                         likely diagnosis?
                        What is the pathogenesis of this            Acute bacterial osteomyelitis occurs either by hematogenous seeding
                         condition?                                  or direct spread from a soft tissue infection. Acute hematogenous
                                                                     osteomyelitis is the most common presentation in children. Acute
                                                                     hematogenous osteomyelitis has a predilection for long bones, as
                                                                     the cancellous framework in the metaphysis facilitates spread of
                                                                     the infection. This patient most likely developed his infection by
                                                                     hematogenous seeding.
                        What are the most likely                    In both infants and children, Staphylococcus aureus is the most
                         pathogens involved in this                  common organism recovered. Other frequent pathogens include
                         condition?                                  group B streptococci and Escherichia coli in neonates, and group
                                                                     A streptococci in children with varicella infection. Streptococcus
                                                                     pneumoniae is an uncommon cause of osteomyelitis but occurs in
                                                                     children under 24 months of age. Kingella kingae (a member of the
                                                                     HACEK group) is an important organism to consider in children < 5
                                                                     years of age. In patients with sickle cell disease, osteomyelitis is often
                                                                     caused by Salmonella, because impaired splenic function predisposes
                                                                     to infection with encapsulated organisms.

                       210
 What is the most appropriate    Initial intravenous antimicrobial therapy should be directed against S.
  treatment for this condition?   aureus and group A streptococci.
                                  Surgical intervention is indicated if the patient has not responded
                                  to antimicrobial therapy; there is evidence of a persistent soft tissue
                                  abscess or subperiosteal collection; or joint infection is suspected or
                                  diagnosed.

                                                                                                              I N FECTIOUS DISEASE

                                                                                                        211
                        CASE 12                    A 31-year-old woman with no known past medical history presents to the emergency
                                                    department in respiratory distress. She recently emigrated with her family from India
                                                    and is unable to speak English. Through a translator, she describes increasing shortness
                                                    of breath over the past 2 weeks with a nonproductive cough. On physical examination,
                                                    she is a thin and ill-appearing woman in respiratory distress. She is notably using her
                                                    accessory muscles to breathe. Vital signs include a temperature of 38.3° C (101.8° F),
                                                    heart rate of 122/min, blood pressure of 122/66 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 34/min,
                                                    and oxygen saturation of 84%. Auscultation of the lungs reveals bibasilar crackles with
                                                    relatively clear middle and upper lung ﬁelds. Her oral cavity reveals a white ﬁlm on her
                                                    tongue and buccal mucosa.

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?       Pneumocystosis. Pneumocystosis is a pneumonia caused by the
                                                                  opportunistic fungal pathogen Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly
                                                                  P. carinii). Occurring primarily in the immunocompromised host,
                                                                  infection with P. jiroveci causes an indolent course of worsening
                                                                  dyspnea, fever, and nonproductive cough. The key physical
                                                                  examination clue is the presence of tachypnea, tachycardia, and
                                                                  cyanosis in the context of a relatively normal lung examination.
                                                                  Diagnosis thus relies on a high index of clinical suspicion and a
                                                                  thorough history. Pneumocystosis is the most common presenting
                                                                  infection in newly diagnosed AIDS.

                        What are the classic radiographic        The classic ﬁndings on chest radiography consist of diffuse, bilateral

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                         ﬁndings for patients with this           inﬁltrates without evidence of distinct hilar adenopathy. They are often
                         condition?                               described as having a “ground-glass” appearance (see Figure 8-1).
                        Below what CD4 count is this             The incidence of Pneumocystis pneumonia increases in direct
                         condition common?                        proportion to the fall in a patient’s CD4 count, with most cases
                                                                  occurring in patients with CD4 counts < 200/mm3. Up to 80% of AIDS
                                                                  patients not receiving prophylaxis will contract P. jiroveci pneumonia
                                                                  (PCP), making it a major cause of AIDS-related death, especially in the
                                                                  developing world.
                        What prophylactic treatment is           Primary prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia should be given to
                         generally administered in such           any patient with a CD4 count < 200/mm3, a CD4 percentage below
                         patients?                                14%, or weight loss or oral candidiasis. Secondary prophylaxis is
                                                                  indicated for both HIV-infected and non-HIV-infected patients with
                                                                  prior PCP infection. Primary and secondary prophylaxis should not
                                                                  be discontinued in patients with HIV until CD4+ counts have been
                                                                  > 200/mm3 for at least 3 months. The ﬁrst-line antimicrobial agent
                                                                  for prophylaxis is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Alternative agents
                                                                  for patients with sulfa allergies include dapsone, pentamidine, and
                                                                  atovaquone-proguanil.
                        What risk factors are associated         Serologic evidence indicates that asymptomatic infections with
                         with an increased incidence of           P. jiroveci occur in most people by a young age. Symptomatic disease,
                         this condition?                          however, tends to occur only in those with abnormal or altered cellular
                                                                  immune systems (i.e., patients with AIDS, severe malnutrition, cancer,
                                                                  etc.).

                       212
FIGURE 8-1.          Ground-glass appearance on chest radiography in
P. jiroveci pneumonia. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL,
Braunwald E, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, Isselbacher J, et
al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
2005: Fig. 191-1.)

                                                                                  I N FECTIOUS DISEASE

                                                                          213
                        CASE 13                    A 22-year-old woman presents to her physician with complaints of fatigue, shortness of
                                                    breath, and loss of appetite. Her symptoms started 2 weeks ago and have progressively
                                                    worsened. She has had a fever for the past 3 days and has been having night sweats.
                                                    Her past medical history is unremarkable except for a wisdom tooth extraction
                                                    approximately 2 months before she came to the clinic. She denies any recent travel,
                                                    and she has no pets or sick contacts. On physical examination, she has a temperature of
                                                    38.6° C (101.4° F), heart rate of 112/min, respiratory rate of 18/min, and blood pressure
                                                    of 110/85 mm Hg. She has a 4/6 holosystolic murmur that radiates to the left axilla.
                                                    Skin examination reveals scattered petechiae on her extremities; nonblanching, linear,
                                                    reddish-brown lesions under her nail beds; and nonpainful erythematous, macular,
                                                    blanching lesions on her palms and soles.

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?        The patient’s symptoms, combined with a heart murmur and associated
                                                                   skin lesions, are most suggestive of subacute infective endocarditis
                                                                   following bacteremia from her dental procedure. The lesions under
                                                                   her nails are most likely splinter hemorrhages, and the macular lesions
                                                                   are probably Janeway lesions.

                        What are common clinical                   Janeway lesions (macular, blanching, nonpainful, erythematous
                         ﬁndings on physical exam that are           lesions on the palms and soles).
                         associated with this condition?            Roth’s spots (exudative, edematous hemorrhagic lesions of the
                                                                     retina).
                                                                    Nail-bed (splinter) hemorrhages.

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                    Osler’s nodes (painful violaceous nodules found in the pulp of
                                                                     ﬁngers and toes).
                                                                    Fever.
                                                                    Anemia.
                                                                    New or changed heart murmur.

                        What risk factors are associated           Rheumatic, congenital, or valvular heart disease.
                         with an increased incidence of             Prosthetic heart valves.
                         this condition?                            IV drug abuse.
                                                                    Immunosuppression.

                        What are the most common                   Streptococci (particularly Streptococcus viridans), 50%.
                         pathogens associated with this               Staphylococcus aureus, 20%.
                         condition in patients without                Enterococci, 10%.
                         prosthetic heart valves?                   HACEK organisms (Haemophilus aphrophilus [recently renamed
                                                                     Aggregatibacter aphrophilus], Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans,
                                                                     Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella
                                                                     kingae), 5%.
                                                                      Culture negative, 5%.

                        What are the most appropriate             Three separate sets of blood cultures, each from a separate
                         next steps in the management of           venipuncture, obtained over 24 hours, are recommended to evaluate
                         this patient?                             suspected endocarditis. Transesophageal echocardiogram is preferred
                                                                   over a transthoracic echocardiogram to evaluate for valvular vegetations.
                                                                   A complete blood count is performed to look for anemia. A basic
                                                                   metabolic panel and urinalysis are performed to evaluate renal function
                                                                   (immune complex glomerulonephritis often occurs in endocarditis).
                        What are some possible                     Cardiac: valvular damage, heart failure, abscesses, pericarditis.
                         complications of this condition?           Neurologic: meningitis/encephalitis, embolic stroke, cerebral
                                                                     hemorrhage, brain abscess or cerebritis, seizures.
                                                                    Renal: renal infarction, glomerulonephritis.
                                                                    Musculoskeletal: osteomyelitis.

                       214
 CASE 14                    A 6-year-old girl presents to the emergency department (ED) with a 6-day history of
                             fever, malaise, irritability, diffuse myalgias, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. She
                             had been seen in the ED 4 days prior to admission for fever, abdominal pain, nausea,
                             and vomiting and was diagnosed with viral gastroenteritis. In the past 4 days, she has
                             developed a rash that started on her wrists and ankles and spread toward her trunk.
                             She has a temperature of 39.3° C (102.7° F), heart rate of 130/min, respiratory rate of
                             16/min, and blood pressure of 87/45 mm Hg. Physical examination is signiﬁcant for
                             hepatosplenomegaly and an erythematous papular rash with scattered petechiae on the
                             trunk, arms, legs, palms, and soles. The patient lives with her parents, two siblings, and
                             three dogs. The family had recently traveled to North Carolina and gone bird watching
                             in the woods. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                             CBC: WBC 11.4/mm3, Platelets 90/mm3
                             AST: 279 U/L
                             ALT: 77 U/L

 What conditions should be                  Ehrlichiosis
  included in the differential               Infectious mononucleosis
  diagnosis?                                 Leptospirosis
                                             Meningococcemia
                                             Rocky Mountain spotted fever
                                             Viral exanthem, especially measles
                                             Viral hepatitis

                                                                                                                          I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
 What is the most likely diagnosis?        The patient’s symptoms are most suggestive of Rocky Mountain spotted
                                            fever (RMSF), a tick-borne illness caused by Rickettsia rickettsii. All
                                            species of rickettsia generally cause a small-vessel vasculitis, manifested
                                            by fever, headache, and rash. Clues to this diagnosis include the
                                            petechial rash that began on her wrists and ankles and spread centrally,
                                            thrombocytopenia, hyponatremia, and elevated liver enzyme levels.
                                            Additionally, the patient recently visited an area with a high incidence
                                            of RMSF.
 What is the epidemiology of this          In the United States, RMSF is most prevalent in the southeastern and
  condition?                                south central states. Most cases of RMSF occur in the spring and early
                                            summer. Two-thirds of cases occur in children under the age of 15
                                            years, with the peak incidence occurring between the ages of 5 and 9
                                            years. Individuals with frequent exposure to dogs and who reside near
                                            wooded areas may also be at increased risk for infection.
 What is the typical rash seen in          Most patients with RMSF develop a rash between 3 and 5 days
  this condition?                           after infection, and it is often not present or is very subtle at initial
                                            presentation. The typical rash of RMSF begins on the ankles and wrists
                                            and spreads both centrally and to the palms and soles. It often begins
                                            as a macular or maculopapular eruption and then usually becomes
                                            petechial. Urticaria and pruritus are not characteristic of RMSF, and
                                            their presence make the diagnosis highly unlikely. Since mortality
                                            increases dramatically after about 5 days, RMSF is an important
                                            diagnosis to suspect even before the rash appears.
 What tests could be used to               Biopsy of a skin lesion can establish the diagnosis of RMSF using direct
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                     immunoﬂuorescence or immunoenzyme methods. Diagnosing RMSF
                                            is best conﬁrmed using the indirect ﬂuorescent antibody test.
 What is the most appropriate              RMSF titers can take days to determine, so antibiotic treatment should
  treatment for this condition?             be initiated immediately when there is a suspicion of RMSF. Doxycycline
                                            is the drug of choice for patients with RMSF, even in children.

                                                                                                                   215
                        CASE 15                    A 67-year-old woman with a past medical history signiﬁcant for rheumatoid arthritis
                                                    for 15 years presents to the emergency department complaining of a painful, swollen
                                                    left knee that has been worsening over the past 3 days. She denies any recent trauma to
                                                    the affected joint and states that she has been compliantly taking methotrexate for her
                                                    rheumatoid arthritis for the past 5 years. She further denies any recent sexual activity
                                                    other than with her husband of 41 years. On physical examination, her temperature
                                                    is 38.5° C (101.3° F), heart rate is 90/min, and blood pressure is 110/74 mm Hg. Her
                                                    knee is markedly warm, erythematous, swollen, and painful. A mild effusion is noted.

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?       Septic arthritis, characterized by the sudden onset of acute arthritis,
                                                                  usually monarticular, most often in large weight-bearing joints or the
                                                                  wrists. Common signs and symptoms include fever, chills, malaise, and
                                                                  joint pain, swelling, and effusion. Other possible diagnoses to consider
                                                                  include gout, pseudogout, and acute rheumatic fever. Gout and
                                                                  pseudogout require visualization of crystals on synovial ﬂuid analysis.
                                                                  Acute rheumatic fever commonly manifests as migratory arthritis and
                                                                  involves many joints rather than a single joint.

                        What are the most common                 Septic arthritis can be divided into two general categories, gonococcal
                         causative pathogens?                     (caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae) and nongonococcal. Staphylococcus
                                                                  aureus is the most common cause of nongonococcal septic arthritis,
                                                                  followed by group A and group B streptococci. In patients with
                                                                  recent arthroscopy or prosthetic joint surgery, S. epidermidis is a

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                                                                  common pathogen. Infection with gram-negative bacteria is becoming
                                                                  increasingly more common, especially in injection drug users and
                                                                  immunocompromised hosts. Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas
                                                                  aeruginosa are the most common gram-negative offenders in adults.
                        What risk factors are associated         Nongonococcal acute bacterial arthritis is usually associated with
                         with an increased incidence of           persistent bacteremia, as with chronic injection drug users or patients
                         this condition?                          with endocarditis, or a damaged or prosthetic joint.
                        What is the most important               In all patients with a swollen or erythematous joint, the joint must be
                         laboratory test in establishing the      aspirated for analysis of the synovial ﬂuid. A leukocyte count < 50,000/
                         diagnosis?                               μL suggests an inﬂammatory condition, such as gout, pseudogout,
                                                                  or rheumatoid arthritis. A leukocyte count > 50,000/μL is consistent
                                                                  with septic arthritis. The differential will usually demonstrate > 90%
                                                                  neutrophils. Values are lower but less well deﬁned for prosthetic joints.
                                                                  Additionally, synovial ﬂuid glucose is usually low, and a Gram stain
                                                                  is positive in 75% of staphylococcal infections and in 50% of gram-
                                                                  negative infections.
                        What are the typical radiographic        Early in the disease, radiographs are usually normal, as joint
                         ﬁndings in this condition?               destruction is rare with prompt treatment. Within a few days, however,
                                                                  demineralization of the bone may become evident. Bony erosions
                                                                  and narrowing of the joint space with subsequent osteomyelitis and
                                                                  periostitis may be seen within 2 weeks if treatment is inadequate.
                        What are the pathologic sequelae         Pathologic changes are fairly consistent regardless of the affected joint.
                         of this condition?                       Pathologic changes include varying degrees of acute inﬂammation,
                                                                  with synovitis, intra-articular effusion, and possible abscess formation in
                                                                  synovial or subchondral tissues. Ultimately, articular destruction occurs
                                                                  if treatment is not adequate.

                       216
 CASE 16                    A 61-year-old man with a past medical history signiﬁcant for coronary artery disease
                             underwent an open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair 2 days ago. The patient has been
                             doing well, with systolic blood pressures ranging between 100 and 120 mm Hg and no
                             evidence of cardiac ischemia detected by telemetry monitoring. He says he is feeling
                             well except for his recent right thigh and knee pain. On physical examination, the right
                             leg is swollen and slightly pale. It is painful to palpation and to full extension.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Thrombophlebitis due to a deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Unlike
                                           superﬁcial phlebitis, which is an inﬂammatory thrombosis of a
                                           superﬁcial normal vein due to infection or trauma from needles
                                           and catheters, or of a varicose vein secondary to chronic venous
                                           insufﬁciency, DVT is due to thrombotic obstruction of a larger vein
                                           with or without an inﬂammatory response. DVT risk is thought
                                           to increase with certain risk factors knows as “Virchow’s triad”
                                           (mnemonic: SHE): Slow blood ﬂow, Hypercoagulability, and
                                           Endothelial damage.

 What other conditions should             Included in the differential diagnosis for DVT are: lymphedema,
  be included in the differential          cellulitis, erysipelas, superﬁcial phlebitis, and lymphangitis. Rupture
  diagnosis?                               of the plantar muscle, although uncommon, produces pain, swelling,
                                           and ecchymotic areas in the dependent ankle area and should be
                                           considered in the appropriate clinical setting.

                                                                                                                        I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
 What are possible complications          The most dreaded complication of DVT is pulmonary embolism,
  of this condition?                       whereby the free-ﬂoating tail of the venous thrombus breaks off and
                                           lodges in the pulmonary vasculature, occluding pulmonary blood
                                           ﬂow and thus preventing gas exchange. Another complication, post-
                                           thrombotic syndrome, occurs as a result of the thrombus damaging
                                           the endothelium and venous valves. Increased venous pressure due to
                                           occlusion of the vein by the thrombus may become greater than the
                                           arterial pressure, compromising blood ﬂow in the affected limb. Long-
                                           term valvular dysfunction can cause chronic extremity edema.
 What is the most appropriate             The treatment of DVT is anticoagulation. IV heparin or low-molecular-
  treatment for this condition?            weight heparin should be initiated and titrated so that the prothrombin
                                           time is 1.5–2 times normal. Warfarin can be started at the same time,
                                           but should be bridged with heparin since it takes up to 5 days to
                                           reach therapeutic anticoagulation. Of note, there is a brief period of
                                           hypercoagulability when beginning warfarin therapy; this is due to the
                                           inhibition of anticoagulants protein C and S, which occurs relatively
                                           fast compared to inhibition of other vitamin K–dependent coagulation
                                           factors. Patients should receive at least 3 months of therapeutic
                                           anticoagulation. Additionally, all patients should wear elastic stockings
                                           and compression devices for at least 3 months and should begin to
                                           ambulate as soon as pain symptoms subside.

                                                                                                                 217
                        CASE 17                    A 59-year-old man with known benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and a history of
                                                    nephrolithiasis presents to the emergency department with a 3-day history of fever and
                                                    ﬂank pain. He always has trouble emptying his bladder but notes that he has had more
                                                    than his usual urgency and frequency over the past several days. Two days ago he began
                                                    to have nausea, and he has not been able to keep anything down for the last 24 hours.
                                                    He takes prazosin and some blood pressure medication, but cannot recall the name of
                                                    the medication. On physical examination, he has a temperature of 38.5° C (101.3° F),
                                                    heart rate of 89/min, and respiratory rate of 14/min. Chest exam is unremarkable. His
                                                    abdomen is soft and nondistended, though he has some discomfort with suprapubic
                                                    palpation. When his right ﬂank is percussed, he almost jumps off the bed in pain. A CT
                                                    scan is performed and is shown in Figure 8-2.
                                                    CBC: WBC 11,000/mm3, hemoglobin 13 g/dL, platelets 330,000/mm3
                                                    UA: nitrites (+), large leukocyte esterase, and moderate blood
                                                    BMP: Na+ 140, K+ 3.7, Cl− 102, CO2 24, BUN 25, Cr 1.1

                        What is the most likely diagnosis?       A urinary tract infection is evident by history and on urinalysis. More
                                                                  speciﬁcally, he has elements of cystitis (frequency, urgency, suprapubic
                                                                  tenderness) and pyelonephritis (fever, ﬂank tenderness, nausea/
                                                                  vomiting).

                        Why does the urinalysis (UA)             Gram negative organisms metabolize the nitrates found in urine
                         detect nitrites and large leukocyte      to nitrites, which are detected on the UA. Since the most frequent

I N FECTIOUS DISEASE
                         esterase?                                causative organism is Escherichia coli (80%), nitrites are often detected
                                                                  on UA. Leukocyte esterase is, as the name implies, an enzyme
                                                                  produced by neutrophils and is detected in both gram-negative and
                                                                  gram-positive infections as well as any other process that breaks down
                                                                  leukocytes.
                        What are the common                      If obstruction is involved (severe BPH or nephrolithiasis),
                         radiographic ﬁndings in this             hydronephrosis can be seen. Otherwise, parenchymal striations
                         condition?                               or perinephric stranding are often seen. Given the history of
                                                                  nephrolithiasis in this patient, ruling out the presence of an infected
                                                                  stone is important.
                        What is the most appropriate             Optimal treatment involves both immediately treating his infection
                         treatment for this condition?            and then subsequent therapy to decrease the likelihood of recurrence.
                                                                  This patient has evidence of dehydration but not of overt renal failure
                                                                  and should be admitted for IV antibiotics and ﬂuids. Antibiotic
                                                                  coverage must include E. coli and coagulase-negative staphylococci, so
                                                                  a ﬂuoroquinolone would be a good ﬁrst choice, since it reaches high
                                                                  concentrations in the urinary system and penetrates well into prostatic
                                                                  tissue. Coverage can be altered as cultures and susceptibilities are
                                                                  determined. Isolation of Staphylococcus aureus would be suggestive
                                                                  of a hematogenous source. Recurrence of pyelonephritis can result
                                                                  in permanent damage and scarring to the kidneys, so steps should be
                                                                  taken to minimize that risk. Once the infection clears, this patient
                                                                  would be a candidate for transurethral resection of the prostate or
                                                                  more rigorous medical management. Referral to an urologist should be
                                                                  considered at this point.

                       218
Musculoskeletal and
Connective Tissue

Case 1                220

Case 2                222

Case 3                223

Case 4                224

Case 5                225

Case 6                226

Case 7                228

Case 8                229

Case 9                230

Case 10               231

Case 11               232

Case 12               234

Case 13               236

Case 14               238

Case 15               240

Case 16               242

Case 17               244

Case 18               245

Case 19               246

Case 20               247

                            219
                       CASE 1                    A 27-year-old man presents to an orthopedic surgeon complaining of back pain and
                                                  stiffness that has progressively worsened over the past 3 years. Initially, the pain was
                                                  mild and intermittent, but currently it is 6/10 even at rest. The patient is occasionally
                                                  awakened from sleep by the pain. The stiffness is worst in the morning and improves
                                                  somewhat with exercise. On examination, the patient has a marked loss of lateral ﬂexion
                                                  of the lumbar spine and point tenderness over the sacroiliac joints. Radiographs of the
                                                  patient’s lumbar spine are signiﬁcant for mild erosion and sclerosis of the subchondral
                                                  bone within the sacroiliac joint. An x-ray of the patient’s spine is shown in Figure
                                                  9-1. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are a WBC count of 7200/mm3 and erythrocyte
                                                  sedimentation rate of 113 mm/hr; results for rheumatoid factor are negative, but results
                                                  for HLA-B27 are positive.

M USC U LOSKE LETAL

                                                  FIGURE 9-1.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Chen MYM, Pope TL, Ott DJ. Basic
                                                  Radiology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 7-45).

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?       Ankylosing spondylitis (AS). AS is a chronic inﬂammatory disease of the
                                                                 axial skeleton manifested by back pain and progressive stiffness of the
                                                                 spine. It characteristically affects young adults, with a peak age of onset
                                                                 between 20 and 30 years. Although classically thought of as a spinal
                                                                 disease, transient acute arthritis of peripheral joints (hips, shoulders,
                                                                 knees) occurs in up to 50% of patients, and chronic changes occur in
                                                                 25%. AS affects men four times as often as women. Ninety to 95% of
                                                                 patients with AS have the tissue antigen human leukocyte antigen-B27
                                                                 (HLA-B27), as compared to 7% of the general population.

                      220
 What is the pathogenesis of this   AS begins with inﬂammation centered at entheses, or the bony
  condition?                         attachments of tendons, ligaments, and joint capsules. This
                                     inﬂammatory process eventually leads to calciﬁcation and ossiﬁcation
                                     at the entheses. Inﬂammation with cellular inﬁltration by lymphocytes,
                                     plasma cells, and polymorphonuclear leukocytes is associated with
                                     erosion and eburnation of the subligamentous bone. This process
                                     always involves the sacroiliac joints. In the paravertebral tissues, the
                                     lesion manifests as formation of new bone within the outer layers of the
                                     annulus ﬁbrosus of the intervertebral disk. The margins of the disk are
                                     invaded by hyperemic granulation tissue arising from the subchondral
                                     bone. This tissue replaces the disk ﬁbers with new bone, leading to
                                     the characteristic “bamboo spine” typically associated with this disease
                                     process and clearly seen in Figure 9-1.
 What conditions should be           Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)—while the
  included in the differential         hyperostotic process in DISH is similar to that in AS, the sacroiliac
  diagnosis?                           joints are typically spared. Furthermore, DISH is characterized by
                                       nonmarginal syndesmophytes, while AS is characterized by marginal
                                       syndesmophytes.
                                      Reiter’s syndrome and psoriatic arthritis-like AS—these distinct
                                       processes behave or share articular features with AS when associated
                                       with HLA-B27. Because of this, the presence of extra-articular
                                       manifestations, like uveitis in Reiter’s and rash in psoriatic arthritis,
                                       are important in differentiating these disorders from AS.

                                                                                                                   M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                      Rheumatoid arthritis—generally easy to differentiate, as it typically
                                       affects small joints of the hands initially. There is no association with
                                       HLA-B27 in this condition.
                                      Spondyloarthropathy associated with inﬂammatory bowel disease—
                                       this may be part of the disease spectrum associated with AS. Many
                                       patients do not develop clinical signs or symptoms of inﬂammatory
                                       bowel disease until many years after the onset of the arthropathy.

                                                                                                            221
                       CASE 2                    A 50-year-old seamstress presents to her primary care physician with numbness and
                                                  pain in the thumb, index, and middle ﬁnger of her right hand. She reports occasionally
                                                  being awakened from sleep by the pain, which is relieved by moving her ﬁngers. She
                                                  notes that the pain comes on when she is holding a piece of cloth for a prolonged
                                                  period while sewing. She also notes that recently she has had difﬁculty unscrewing
                                                  jar tops and holding onto a glass or tea cup after a long day at work. She denies any
                                                  trauma to her right hand, pain in other joints, fevers, or chills. On physical exam, the
                                                  paresthesia is reproducible by having her hold her wrist ﬂexed at 90 degrees for 30
                                                  seconds. Tapping on her right wrist reproduces the pain.

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?       Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). CTS is caused by compression
                                                                 of the median nerve as it passes through the carpal tunnel. Most
                                                                 common causes are activities requiring repetitive motion of the wrist,
                                                                 trauma to the carpal bones, and ﬂexor tenosynovitis. CTS can also be
                                                                 secondary to systemic illnesses such as rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis,
                                                                 amyloidosis, acromegaly, hypothyroidism, and diabetes.

                       What other symptoms are                  Patients with CTS have paresthesias in the median nerve distribution
                        common in patients with this             of the hand. Pain in the affected hand is worse at night than during the
                        condition?                               day and may awaken the patients from sleep. Classically, CTS is not
                                                                 associated with pain or paresthesia on the dorsal aspect of the hand.
                       What tests could be used to              The Phalen maneuver, Tinel sign, and wrist compression tests are

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                        conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    used to establish the diagnosis. A positive Phalen sign is the presence
                                                                 of parasthesias along the median nerve after wrist ﬂexion at 90 degrees
                                                                 for 30 seconds. A positive Tinel sign is pain radiating to the thumb,
                                                                 index, middle, or ring ﬁnger when the skin over the median nerve is
                                                                 percussed. The wrist compression test is the reproduction of symptoms
                                                                 after applying pressure over the median nerve proximal to the wrist for
                                                                 30 seconds.
                       What is the most appropriate             Conservative treatments include prescribed rest with a wrist splint and
                        treatment for this condition?            elevation of the hand to reduce swelling and pressure on the median
                                                                 nerve. For temporary relief, steroids can be injected into the carpal
                                                                 tunnel. Patients unresponsive to conservative treatment can undergo
                                                                 surgical division of the ﬂexor retinaculum following conﬁrmatory
                                                                 median nerve conduction testing.

                      222
 CASE 3                    A 25-year-old man involved in a motor vehicle accident is brought by ambulance to the
                            nearest emergency department for evaluation of multiple cuts, bruises, and a swollen
                            and extremely painful leg. On physical examination, his left leg is slightly cool and is
                            swollen and tense relative to his right leg. He describes feeling “pins and needles” in
                            his toes; he also has extreme difﬁculty dorsiﬂexing his left ankle. Dorsalis pedis and
                            posterior tibial pulses are weak. Relevant ﬁndings include a temperature of 37° C
                            (99.7° F), a blood pressure of 140/90 mm Hg, and a lateral compartment pressure of 60
                            mm Hg on compartment manometry of his left leg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Compartment syndrome. Given a swollen leg with tense
                                           compartments, extreme pain, paresthesias (numbness and tingling),
                                           poor pulses, and, most importantly, high compartment pressure,
                                           compartment syndrome becomes a likely diagnosis that must be
                                           considered, since compartment syndrome is one of the few true
                                           orthopedic emergencies. This patient has a crush injury, which
                                           places the leg at risk for the development of compartment syndrome.
                                           Compartment syndrome should also be suspected when pain is out of
                                           proportion to the injury.

 What are the causes of this              Compartment syndrome occurs when the tissue pressure rises above
  condition?                               the perfusion pressure inside a closed anatomic space. Compartment
                                           syndrome tends to occur most commonly in the forearm or in the leg.
                                           The two most common causes are an externally applied compressive

                                                                                                                          M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                           force or an expanding internal force (such as an arterial bleed,
                                           overexertion, or a fracture). Regardless of the mechanism, the common
                                           end point is ischemia and subsequent reperfusion injury (particularly
                                           in cases of vascular injury) to the muscles in the affected compartment.
                                           Within 6–10 hours, muscle infarction and necrosis, as well as nerve
                                           damage, ensues.
 What are the signs and symptoms          Classically, compartment syndrome presents with the “6 P’s”: Pain,
  associated with this condition?          Pallor, Poikilothermia, Pulselessness, Paresthesia, and Paralysis;
                                           however, the best clinical test is pain with passive stretching of the great
                                           toe. Though unnecessary for treatment (with high suspicion, patients
                                           should undergo immediate surgical intervention), manometry is often
                                           used to diagnose compartment syndrome. Normal compartment
                                           pressure is about 0 mm Hg. A compartment pressure > 30 mm Hg
                                           or a difference of < 30 mm Hg between compartment and diastolic
                                           pressures portends ischemic injury. As muscle infarction and necrosis
                                           occur, the serum creatine kinase may be elevated in the 1000–5000
                                           U/mL range.
 What is the most appropriate             Emergent fasciotomy is the only proven treatment for acute
  treatment for this condition?            compartment syndrome. This procedure, in which the fascia enclosing
                                           the compartment is opened, allows for relief of the building tissue
                                           pressure. In cases in which compartment syndrome is diagnosed very
                                           late (3–5 days after symptom onset), the beneﬁt of surgical intervention
                                           must be balanced against the increased risk of complications, as deep
                                           infection will occur with greater frequency in necrotic muscle. As a
                                           general rule, if there is little to no muscular or neurologic function,
                                           most surgeons would not perform a fasciotomy in the 3–5-day range.

                                                                                                                  223
                       CASE 4                      A 54-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with muscle weakness
                                                    and a crusty, scaly rash on her knuckles and over her eyelids. For the past couple of
                                                    months, she has had difﬁculty getting out of a chair but attributed it to aging. The rash
                                                    developed 2 weeks after visiting a self-tanning salon and is extremely pruritic. She has
                                                    tried taking antihistamines and applying moisturizer to the area but reports no relief.
                                                    The itching is so severe that it often wakens her at night. She denies fevers, chills, or
                                                    changes in detergents or creams. She is taking no medication except the antihistamine.
                                                    On examination, she is afebrile with a heart rate of 70/min, blood pressure of 110/80
                                                    mm Hg, and a respiratory rate of 13/min. Notable ﬁndings include prominent
                                                    violaceous papules over the metacarpophalangeal joints of her hands and over her
                                                    upper eyelids and a rash with a shawl-like distribution over her anterior neck, upper
                                                    chest, and back. Relevant labs are as follows:
                                                    Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 60 mm/hr
                                                    Antinuclear antibody: 1:320
                                                    Creatine phosphokinase level: 510 U/L

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?        Dermatomyositis (DM). DM is a systemic connective tissue disease
                                                                  leading to proximal muscle weakness with cutaneous ﬁndings. The
                                                                  proximal muscle weakness and characteristic distribution of the rash
                                                                  are pathognomonic for DM. Other causes of proximal muscle weakness
                                                                  include motor neuron diseases, muscular dystrophies, rheumatoid
                                                                  arthritis, and polymyositis. However, the characteristic distribution of

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                                                  the rash makes these diseases less likely.

                       How do patients with this                 DM is a progressive autoimmune connective tissue disease of unknown
                        condition typically present?              etiology. Infectious agents such as coxsackie and inﬂuenza virus have
                                                                  been suggested as possible triggers of the disease. DM tends to affect
                                                                  individuals > 60 years old, and women are twice as likely as men to be
                                                                  affected. Patients often present with symmetric, progressive proximal
                                                                  muscle weakness leading to difﬁculty squatting, kneeling, rising
                                                                  from a chair, or climbing stairs. Other characteristic ﬁndings are the
                                                                  heliotrope rash (violaceous periorbital rash), a purple-red papular/scaly
                                                                  photosensitive rash distributed in a “v” or “shawl” over the neck and
                                                                  chest, and Gottron’s papules (papules located on the dorsum of the
                                                                  hands and over bony prominences).
                       How is this condition diagnosed?          A number of features suggest the diagnosis:
                                                                   Muscle weakness.
                                                                   Rash involving dorsal hands, periorbital and necklace areas.
                                                                   Increased creatine phosphokinase (CPK)/aldolase.
                                                                   Muscle biopsy showing T-cell inﬁltrate with myonecrosis.
                                                                   Electromyogram showing muscle irritation with increased spike
                                                                     amplitude.
                                                                   MRI, especially of the thigh, showing muscle edema.

                                                                  Positive ANA and elevated levels of serum creatine/aldolase and CPK
                                                                  are usually present. In 50% of patients, ESR will be elevated and in
                                                                  30% of patients myositis-speciﬁc antibodies (anti-jo, anti-mi2, and
                                                                  anti-pm1) will be positive.
                       What is the most appropriate              High-dose glucocorticoids will increase muscle strength in 4–6 weeks
                        treatment for this condition?             and can be tapered to a lower dose for maintenance therapy. Skin
                                                                  manifestations are difﬁcult to treat and patients are encouraged to
                                                                  avoid sunlight exposure and liberally apply sunscreen. Patients have an
                                                                  increased risk for malignancy and should be closely monitored.

                      224
 CASE 5                    A 4-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician because he has been having difﬁculty
                            in preschool with both learning and play activity. In the ﬁrst 2 years of life, the patient
                            successfully reached many developmental milestones including holding his head up,
                            rolling over, sitting, and standing at the appropriate ages. However, he did not begin
                            to walk until 16 months. By age 2, he was walking with a lordotic posture. The patient
                            had been doing fairly well prior to beginning preschool, but over the past 5 months
                            both the patient’s parents and teacher have noticed that he seems to be regressing. In
                            particular, he does not seem to be able to run around with the other kids in his class
                            and has difﬁculty rising from a seated position. His physical exam is notable for 3/5
                            strength in the proximal muscles of both the upper and lower extremities. The patient’s
                            gastrocnemius muscles appear disproportionately large bilaterally. When lying prone
                            and asked to raise himself to a standing position, the patient has great difﬁculty and
                            needs to push off with his arms, and then push against his knees and thighs in order to
                            stand. Laboratory examination is signiﬁcant for an elevated serum creatine kinase level
                            of 27,000 IU/L.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy (DMD). DMD is the most common
                                           childhood-onset muscular dystrophy, with an incidence of 1 in 3500
                                           live male births. Because this disease follows an X-linked pattern of
                                           inheritance, it almost exclusively affects males. One-third of these
                                           cases are due to spontaneous mutations, while the rest are inherited
                                           in an X-linked dominant manner. Gonadal mosaicism accounts for
                                           approximately 20% of new DMD cases.

                                                                                                                          M USC U LOSKE LETAL
 What common musculoskeletal              Patients typically present with progressive weakness, most often starting
  signs and symptoms are associated        with the muscles of the axial skeleton and the proximal lower extremity.
  with this condition?                     Because of this pattern of involvement, affected children tend to have
                                           difﬁculty with activities such as running, jumping, and walking up
                                           steps. When arising from the ﬂoor, affected boys use their hands to
                                           push themselves to an upright position, a manuever termed Gower’s
                                           sign. In addition to these symptoms, patients often exhibit a waddling
                                           gait, lordotic curvature of the spine, and pseudohypertrophy of the
                                           gastrocenemius muscles. Patients also develop scoliosis secondary to
                                           unequal weakening of the paravertebral muscles. Most affected boys
                                           present with their ﬁrst symptoms between the ages of 3 and 7 and are
                                           wheelchair bound by the age of 12.
 What is the pathogenesis of this         DMD results from a deﬁciency of dystrophin, a protein important to
  condition?                               the structural stability of the myoﬁber. In the absence of dystrophin,
                                           proteins responsible for protecting the integrity of the sarcolemma
                                           (the muscle cell membrane) are digested by proteases. This change
                                           renders the sarcolemma susceptible to breaks and tears during
                                           muscle contraction and eventually leads to the progressive weakness
                                           experienced by the patient.
 What other symptoms are                  Dystrophin is also found in the heart and the brain, so cardiac ﬁbrosis
  common in patients with this             and/or cardiomyopathy are commonly found. Some patients suffer from
  condition?                               varying levels of mental retardation.
 What are the main causes of              Death usually occurs secondary to pulmonary infections and respiratory
  mortality in this condition?             failure. Fewer than 25% of affected individuals live past the age of 25.
 What is the most appropriate             Supportive care for the patient and his family to help maintain function
  treatment for this condition?            and optimal quality of life. Corticosteroid therapy has been tried but
                                           its beneﬁts may not outweigh the side effects of growth retardation and
                                           weight gain.

                                                                                                                   225
                       CASE 6                   A 35-year-old man is referred to an orthopedic surgeon for severe back pain radiating to
                                                 his left leg. He has not been able to play in his weekly basketball game since the pain
                                                 began 5 weeks ago. During the past 2 weeks, he says the pain has increased in severity
                                                 and he can only sit for 20 minutes before the shooting pain becomes intolerable. The
                                                 patient claims that he has had back pain before, but it has never been this severe and
                                                 has always been well controlled with over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
                                                 medications (NSAIDs). Currently, he reports getting no relief from NSAIDs. The pain
                                                 has begun to affect his ability to sleep, as he wakes up in pain every 1–2 hours. He
                                                 denies any recent back injury, infection, weight loss, or changes in appetite. The patient
                                                 appears to have an athletic build and stands throughout the ofﬁce visit. On physical
                                                 exam, raising the patient’s left leg 30 degrees above the horizontal plane reproduces the
                                                 pain; this does not occur with his right leg. The patient has no focal lower extremity
                                                 weakness, but he does have an absent Achilles tendon reﬂex on the left. An MRI of the
                                                 lower spine is shown in Figure 9-2.

M USC U LOSKE LETAL

                                                 FIGURE 9-2.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Skinner HB. Current Diagnosis &
                                                 Treatment in Orthopedics, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003: Fig. 5-10.)

                       What is the pathophysiology of          The term herniated disk refers to a protrusion of the nucleus pulposus
                        this condition?                         through a weakened area of the surrounding annulus ﬁbrosus of an
                                                                intervertebral disk. In Figure 9-2, the MRI shows a large posterolateral
                                                                disk herniation at L5–S1, with compression of the S1 nerve root. In
                                                                an acute disk herniation, there is often a period of mild back pain that
                                                                precedes the typical presenting symptoms; this is commonly due to
                                                                the initial tear in the annulus ﬁbrosus. Because this back pain is mild,
                                                                most patients do not associate an acute event with their presenting
                                                                pain. In the weeks following this initial event, the extrusion of the
                                                                nucleus pulposus can eventually compress the nerve root and produce
                                                                symptoms such as those seen in this patient.

                      226
 What other symptoms are            Often, this extrusion will place direct mechanical pressure on an
  common in patients with this       affected spinal nerve root, causing symptoms of radiculopathy,
  condition?                         weakness, and sensory deﬁcits. Patients will usually present with back
                                     or buttock pain. In addition, most will also have pain radiating down
                                     their thigh to their calf. The straight leg raise test, ﬂexion of the thigh
                                     with the knee extended, on the affected side, causes stretching of the
                                     sciatic nerve which will often exacerbate and/or reproduce the patient’s
                                     symptoms.
 What imaging tools could be used   The ideal imaging diagnostic modality must be able to detect extrusion
  to conﬁrm the diagnosis?           of the nucleus pulposus, which is a soft tissue, and visualize the spinal
                                     canal and spinal roots. As such, a plain radiograph of the spine is of
                                     little use. The historical gold standard was a myelogram, which was
                                     later replaced by the development of the CT myelogram of the lumbar
                                     spine. The current practice is a spine MRI, which has a high sensitivity
                                     and speciﬁcity.
 What is the most appropriate       Treatment should start with conservative management, namely bed
  treatment for this condition?      rest and medications directed at alleviating pain and reducing muscle
                                     spasm. NSAIDs, including COX-2 inhibitors, are often successful in
                                     relieving pain. In addition, most patients will beneﬁt from sleeping
                                     with a pillow under the knees. In patients who fail this initial
                                     management after a trial period of 4–6 weeks, epidural injection of
                                     steroids can be given to relieve the radicular pain and inﬂammation.
                                     This is often utilized as a temporizing measure to provide the

                                                                                                                   M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                     patient with relief in the short to medium term. In general, if these
                                     conservative treatments do not relieve pain after 6 weeks, surgical
                                     intervention can be pursued. Surgical options include injection
                                     therapy, percutaneous diskectomy, microsurgical diskectomy, and
                                     traditional hemilaminectomy with disk excision.

                                                                                                           227
                       CASE 7                     A 45-year-old man presents to the emergency department complaining of pain and
                                                   swelling of his great left toe. He reports being awoken from sleep by the pain, which
                                                   is 9/10 in severity. In addition, his proximal medial foot is swollen and erythematous.
                                                   The patient denies any history of trauma, recent illness, or intravenous drug abuse.
                                                   The patient admits that he drinks alcohol heavily on occasion and had 10 or 15
                                                   beers 2 days ago while at a party. He is married and has been in a monogamous
                                                   relationship with his wife for the past 20 years. His past medical history is signiﬁcant
                                                   only for mild hypertension, which is well controlled with hydrochlorothiazide. On
                                                   examination, the patient is clearly in signiﬁcant distress due to the pain. The patient’s
                                                   metatarsophalangeal joint appears warm, erythematous, edematous, and tender to
                                                   palpation. The patient’s temperature is 38.7° C (101.7° F), and his heart rate is 92/min.
                                                   Joint ﬂuid analysis reveals a WBC count of 80,000/mm3; results of culture are pending.
                                                   A Gram stain of joint ﬂuid is negative, but microscopic analysis reveals negatively
                                                   birefringent needle-shaped crystals.

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?       Gouty arthritis. This is a peripheral arthritis that results from the
                                                                 deposition of sodium urate crystals in one or more joints. Podagra,
                                                                 or pain in the ﬁrst metatarsophalangeal joint, is the classic initial
                                                                 presentation of gout. Gout tends to occur in males more than females,
                                                                 beginning between the ages of 30 and 50. Pseudogout is a similar
                                                                 arthritic crystallopathy marked by positively birefringent crystals and
                                                                 should be included in the differential.

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                       What risk factors are associated         Common risk factors for gout include family history of gout, heavy
                        with an increased incidence of           alcohol consumption, lead toxicity, male gender, obesity, older age,
                        this condition?                          renal insufﬁciency, use of thiazide diuretics
                       What is the pathogenesis of this         Gout results from hyperuricemia (supersaturation of blood with urate),
                        condition?                               although only 5% of those with hyperuricemia will develop gout.
                                                                 Primary gout may be due to an inborn error of metabolism (rare)
                                                                 or from defects in renal handling of uric acid. Common causes of
                                                                 secondary gout include renal disease and conditions with increased
                                                                 nucleic acid turnover.
                       What is the most appropriate             The goal of treatment in acute gouty arthritis is prompt alleviation of
                        treatment for this condition?            pain and disability. High-dose nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs
                                                                 (NSAIDs) are the ﬁrst-line therapy in this setting. Indomethacin is
                                                                 particularly effective. A second option for acute gout is intra-articular
                                                                 or systemic corticosteroids. Candidates for systemic steroids are patients
                                                                 with polyarticular disease who cannot tolerate NSAIDs due to GI,
                                                                 renal, or congestive heart diseases. High-dose colchicine can be used
                                                                 orally for acute gout ﬂares, but its utility is limited by predictable
                                                                 distressing GI side effects. The best use of colchicine is in low daily
                                                                 dosage as prophylaxis against acute gout ﬂares during the ﬁrst 3–6
                                                                 months of urate-lowering therapy. Long-term goals for the patient
                                                                 would be cure by reduction and maintenance of urate levels below 6
                                                                 mg/dL. Urate levels can be lowered by 1–2 mg/dL by diet modiﬁcation
                                                                 and avoidance of thiazide diruetics, but uricosuric (probenecid) or
                                                                 allopurinol therapy is usually needed to achieve target urate levels in
                                                                 persons with gout.

                      228
 CASE 8                     A 68-year-old woman with a history of depression, anxiety, and irritable bowel syndrome
                             presents to her primary care physician with muscle aches and weakness, joint pain, and
                             fatigue. She reports continued fatigue despite sleeping 10 hours each night. The muscle
                             ache is described as a tight, burning stiffness that spreads across the upper part of her
                             back. The pain is worse in the morning but gradually improves throughout the day.
                             She also reports occasional back pain that radiates down her buttocks to her legs. On
                             examination, her blood pressure is 132/70 mm Hg, pulse is 73/min, and respiratory rate
                             is 12/min. Motor examination of the lower and upper extremities reveals no weakness
                             or decreased range of motion. Her joints are not warm or edematous. Her neurological
                             exam is normal.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Fibromyalgia. Fibromyalgia is a connective tissue disorder deﬁned
                                           by multiple speciﬁc trigger points (≥ 11 of 18) that, when palpated,
                                           reproduce the pain. Fibromyalgia is a diagnosis of exclusion, so other
                                           diseases such as lumbar degenerative disk disease, hypothyroidism,
                                           cervical disk disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus
                                           erythematosus (SLE) must be ruled out. Lumbar degenerative disk
                                           disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and cervical disk disease can be ruled out
                                           with imaging studies such as an MRI. SLE is an autoimmune disease
                                           deﬁned by speciﬁc criteria and the presence of autoantibodies (ANA,
                                           anti-Smith, anti-dsDNA, anti-cardiolipin, and lupus anticoagulant).

 What other symptoms are                  Fibromyalgia is characterized by myalgia, weakness, and fatigability

                                                                                                                         M USC U LOSKE LETAL
  common in patients with this             in the absence of inﬂammation. It is associated with conditions such
  condition?                               as depression, anxiety, and irritable bowel syndrome and is commonly
                                           seen in women > 50 years of age. Patients often describe the pain as
                                           widespread or global and shifting in intensity and location. The average
                                           patient has seen an average of 15 physicians and endured 5 years of
                                           ﬁbromyalgia before receiving the correct diagnosis. Therefore, many
                                           patients are frustrated and skeptical.
 What are the criteria required to        The diagnostic criteria require the presence of pain in all four
  diagnose this condition?                 quadrants of the body for at least 3 months and at least 11 of 18
                                           anatomically speciﬁc tender points. Because ﬁbromyalgia is a diagnosis
                                           of exclusion other diseases, as described above, must be ruled out.
 What is the most appropriate             Treatment is based on supportive measures such as stretching, other
  treatment for this condition?            therapeutic exercises, massages, and simple analgesics. Reassurance of
                                           the benign nature of the disease, patient education, stress reduction,
                                           psychotherapy, and low dose antidepressants can also help in the
                                           alleviation of symptoms.

                                                                                                                 229
                       CASE 9                    A 4-year-old girl is brought to her pediatrician by her parents because they are
                                                  concerned about her right knee. For the past several months, the patient’s right knee has
                                                  been swollen and she often limps. Her parents note that sometimes she does not want to
                                                  walk in the morning, but seems ﬁne later in the day. The patient’s past medical history
                                                  is unremarkable. On physical examine, there appears to be a large effusion of the right
                                                  knee but no erythema, increased warmth, or tenderness to palpation or range of motion
                                                  testing. The right knee has a passive range of motion of 15–120 degrees. Relevant
                                                  laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                  WBC count: 8.6/mm3 (45% polymorphonuclear cells, 47% lymphocytes,
                                                  8% monocytes)
                                                  RBC count: 12,000/mm3
                                                  Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 20 mm/hr
                                                  Urinalysis: normal
                                                  Rheumatoid factor: negative
                                                  Antinuclear antibody titer: 1:640

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?      Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA). JRA is a disease or group of
                                                                diseases characterized by chronic joint inﬂammation. JRA affects
                                                                approximately 10–20 per 100,000 children. Whereas both sexes are
                                                                affected equally in systemic JRA, females are affected more frequently
                                                                in pauciarticular JRA. Most children develop symptoms in early
                                                                childhood, and approximately 95% of cases resolve by puberty. Because

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                                                JRA is a diagnosis of exclusion, it is important to rule out infection and
                                                                malignancy.

                       What is the pathogenesis of this        The etiology of JRA is unknown. It is thought that the chronic
                        condition?                              inﬂammation of the joint is caused by B lymphocytic inﬁltration and
                                                                expansion and increased cytokine release by macrophages and T cells.
                       What tests and/or imaging tools         There is no speciﬁc diagnostic test for JRA. Rheumatoid factor and
                        could be used to conﬁrm the             antinuclear antibody can occasionally be positive in JRA. A positive
                        diagnosis?                              ANA or HLA-B27 increases the risk of uveitis. Synovial biopsy may be
                                                                helpful in demonstrating synovial inﬁltration with plasma cells, mature
                                                                B lymphocytes, and T lymphocytes, with areas of synovial thickening
                                                                and ﬁbrosis.
                       What is the most appropriate            Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the ﬁrst-line
                        treatment for this condition?           therapy in the treatment of JRA. While NSAIDs are effective in the
                                                                treatment of pauciarticular JRA, NSAIDs alone are rarely effective in
                                                                the treatment of polyarticular or systemic JRA. In patients in whom
                                                                NSAIDs are ineffective, glucocorticoids can be given either orally or
                                                                intravenously. In cases refractory to steroids, immunosuppressive agents
                                                                such as methotrexate or TNF-α-receptor antagonists are sometimes
                                                                effective. In addition, patients can beneﬁt from a rigorous physical
                                                                therapy regimen focused on strength training and maintaining or
                                                                improving the range of motion of affected joints.

                      230
 CASE 10                    A 9-year-old boy is referred to a pediatric sports medicine physician due to a history of
                             intermittent pain in his right hip. The pain began during a soccer game 6 months ago
                             and has increased in severity over this time. Although he has tried activity restriction
                             and crutches, the right hip continues to bother him, especially with any activity. He had
                             an uncomplicated birth and a past medical history negative for trauma or signiﬁcant
                             illness. He has no family history of similar complaints or disability. On physical
                             examination, the patient is a healthy well-nourished boy who is at the 50th percentile
                             for both height and weight for his age. He is afebrile and has stable vital signs. He
                             walks with an antalgic gait. There are no obvious deformities of either lower extremity.
                             However, he has marked discomfort to palpation over the entire right hip region, and
                             internal rotation and hip abduction cause signiﬁcant pain. When compared with the
                             opposite side, the right hip has decreased range of motion noted in abduction, internal
                             rotation, and ﬂexion. A full laboratory workup was within normal limits. An x-ray of the
                             affected right hip demonstrates a “moth-eaten” radiolucency suggestive of osteopenia of
                             the femoral epiphysis and neck with a shortened femoral epiphysis. A bone scan of the
                             lower extremities demonstrates evidence of avascularity of the right femoral epiphysis.

 What conditions should be                The differential diagnosis of limp in the pediatric population is
  considered in the differential           substantial and includes Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease (LCPD), toxic
  diagnosis?                               synovitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and septic (including tuberculous)
                                           arthritis. The x-ray ﬁndings of epiphyseal abnormalities seen in LCPD
                                           can also be seen in Gaucher’s disease, and hypothyroidism. Avascular
                                           necrosis seen in LCPD can also be secondary to sickle cell anemia,

                                                                                                                         M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                           trauma, or chronic corticosteroid use.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       LCPD. The combination of history, physical examination and
                                           radiological testing makes LCPD the most likely diagnosis. LCPD is
                                           a relatively uncommon hip condition affecting 1 in 2000 children.
                                           Boys are affected ﬁve times as often as girls, and the disease presents
                                           most often between 4–10 years of age. The hallmark of this disease is
                                           avascular necrosis of the capital femoral epiphysis, which often leads
                                           to abnormal hip joint development and/or permanent deformity of the
                                           femoral head.
 What is the prognosis for patients       Fifty percent of cases do well with conservative (nonoperative
  with this condition?                     treatment). Age is the key to the prognosis:
                                            < 6 years old: outcome is almost always good regardless of treatment.
                                            6–8 years old: many do well with bracing, some require surgical
                                              treatment.
                                            > 9 years old and those with severe deformity: most will beneﬁt from
                                              surgical treatment such as femoral osteotomy.

                                                                                                                 231
                       CASE 11                    A 13-year-old boy presents to the orthopedic surgeon with progressively worsening right
                                                   leg pain of 6 weeks’ duration. The patient says the pain began after being tackled in a
                                                   football game 6 weeks ago. Since then, the pain has not improved despite ample rest,
                                                   ice therapy, and ibuprofen. The pain also increases with activity. In addition, he noted
                                                   a lump behind his knee after the game that has not resolved. On physical examination,
                                                   there is a small but palpable mass in the popliteal region of the patient’s right leg. In
                                                   addition, there is a slight decrease in passive range of motion in the patient’s right
                                                   knee when compared to the left. The patient has full strength in all extremities and
                                                   exhibits no neurological deﬁcits. Plain anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the
                                                   patient’s right knee reveal a large lesion with osteoblastic and osteolytic changes. On the
                                                   posterior aspect of the supracondylar region of the femur, there is a prominent elevation
                                                   of the periosteum.

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?        Osteosarcoma, a primary malignant tumor of bone in which the
                                                                  malignant cells produce osteoid or immature bone. Osteosarcoma is
                                                                  the third most common cancer in adolescence, behind lymphomas
                                                                  and brain tumors. This condition is more common in boys than in
                                                                  girls and has a higher incidence in African Americans. Most cases are
                                                                  diagnosed in children between the ages of 5 and 20 years old, but this
                                                                  disease has a bimodal distribution, with a second peak after 65 years of
                                                                  age. Osteosarcoma can arise from any bone but has a predilection for
                                                                  the long bones of the extremities near the metaphyseal growth plates.

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                       What risk factors are associated          Risk factors include rapid bone growth (most cases occur during
                        with an increased incidence of            adolescence at peak linear growth) and radiation exposure. There are
                        this condition?                           a number of genetic syndromes, including Li-Fraumeni syndrome
                                                                  (germline TP53 mutation) and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome,
                                                                  that predispose patients to osteosarcoma. In addition, there are bone
                                                                  conditions such as Paget’s disease, ﬁbrous dysplasia, enchondromatosis,
                                                                  and hereditary multiple exostoses, which increase a patient’s risk of
                                                                  developing osteosarcoma.
                       What are the typical radiographic         Classical ﬁndings on plain ﬁlm are a destructive lesion with a moth-
                        ﬁndings in this condition?                eaten appearance, a spiculated periosteal reaction (sunburst pattern),
                                                                  and elevation of the periosteum due to new bone formation (Codman’s
                                                                  triangle) (see Figure 9-3). Thirty-ﬁve percent of plain radiographs show
                                                                  a purely osteolytic lesion, 45% show a purely osteoblastic lesion, and
                                                                  20% show a mixed lesion. The entire bone and adjacent joint should
                                                                  be imaged for skip lesions and joint involvement. A bone biopsy is
                                                                  necessary for diagnosis.
                       What is the most appropriate              Surgical resection of the primary lesion is the only deﬁnitive treatment.
                        treatment for this condition?             Preoperative (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy can be used to shrink
                                                                  the tumor and improve the success of resecting the tumor. Limb
                                                                  amputation is typically the procedure of choice but a less radical
                                                                  resection is possible if the surgical margins are determined to be tumor
                                                                  free by frozen section analysis.

                      232
FIGURE 9-3.        Prominent Codman’s triangle and sunburst appearance.
(Reproduced, with permission, from the Pathology Education Instructional

                                                                                      M USC U LOSKE LETAL
Resource Digital Library [http://peir.net] at the University of Alabama, Bir-
mingham.)

                                                                                233
                       CASE 12                    A 35-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a 6-week history of
                                                   hand stiffness, swelling, and pain. The stiffness is worst in the morning, taking up to
                                                   an hour to become “more manageable.” Upon further questioning, the patient admits
                                                   that she has been having some pain in her knees as well over the past 6 months but
                                                   thought that it was related to inactivity. The patient denies any fevers, rashes, or recent
                                                   illness. She is currently in a stable relationship, and both she and her partner were
                                                   recently tested and found to be negative for sexually transmitted diseases. She denies
                                                   any decreased sensation or color changes in her ﬁngers during exposure to the cold.
                                                   The patient notes that her grandmother had “arthritis” but does not recall the details.
                                                   Her physical examination is signiﬁcant for mild swelling and tenderness over the
                                                   metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints of both hands. Her knees also have slight warmth
                                                   and small effusions bilaterally but no point tenderness or loss of range of motion. The
                                                   patient has no rashes or mouth ulcers. Her lungs are clear, and her heart has a regular
                                                   rate and rhythm. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                   WBC count: 8200/mm3
                                                   Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 50 mm/hr
                                                   C-reactive protein: 2 mg/L
                                                   Antinuclear antibody: negative
                                                   Rheumatoid factor (RF): highly positive
                                                   Radiographs of the wrist reveal soft tissue swelling and slight osteopenia. Radiographs of
                                                   the knees are normal. An MRI of the wrists shows erosions of the MCP joints bilaterally.

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                       What is the most likely diagnosis?        Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Her relatively young age, gender (females
                                                                  are affected most often), family history, symmetrical nature of her
                                                                  symptoms, and the related negative ﬁndings make RA most likely.
                                                                  While this patient’s presenting symptoms and signs do not rule
                                                                  out other systemic autoimmune processes such as systemic lupus
                                                                  erythematosus (SLE), the lack of classic SLE ﬁndings (e.g., malar rash,
                                                                  oral ulcers, and pleuritis) point to RA.

                       What are the deﬁning features of          A patient must have four of the following seven signs and symptoms to
                        this condition?                           be diagnosed with RA. The ﬁrst four criteria must be present for at least
                                                                  6 weeks and the last three must be observed by a physician.
                                                                   Erosions and/or periarticular osteopenia seen on radiographs in hand
                                                                    or wrist joints.
                                                                   Morning stiffness (at least 1 hour).
                                                                   Serum rheumatoid factor.
                                                                   Subcutaneous nodules.
                                                                   Swelling of hand joints (proximal interphalangeal [PIP], MCP, or
                                                                    wrist).
                                                                   Swelling of three or more joints.
                                                                   Symmetrical soft tissue swelling about the joints.

                       What is the mechanism of                  RA is caused by an autoimmune-mediated inﬂammatory response
                        arthritic degeneration in this            in which T cells and macrophages invade the synovial lining of the
                        condition?                                joints. The release of inﬂammatory cytokines leads to the formation
                                                                  of a pannus, which invades and destroys adjacent bone and cartilage.
                                                                  The MCP and PIP joints are most often involved. Common
                                                                  ﬁndings include ulnar deviation of the wrist, swan-neck deformities
                                                                  (hyperextension of the PIP joint), and/or boutonnière deformities
                                                                  (hyperﬂexion of the PIPs) of the ﬁngers (see Figure 9-4).

                      234
 What is the most appropriate    The goal of treatment is halting the progression of the disease and
  treatment for this condition?   symptom management and should be started as early as possible. Most
                                  patients are treated with a combination of NSAIDs, corticosteroids,
                                  and a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD). Examples of
                                  common DMARDs include methotrexate, TNF-α antagonists, and
                                  interleukin-1 antagonists.

                                  FIGURE 9-4.       Deformities including marked ulnar deviation, swan-neck

                                                                                                                  M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                  deformity, active synovitis, and nodules. (Reproduced, with permission, from
                                  Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar TR, Dunn DL, Hunter JG, Matthews JB,
                                  Pollock RE, Schwartz SI. Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery, 8th ed. New York:
                                  McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 43-115.)

                                                                                                            235
                       CASE 13                   A 50-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with cold and painful
                                                  ﬁngers. In addition to the pain, she has a lump on the dorsal aspect of her proximal
                                                  carpophalangeal joint. Since her teenage years, she has always had difﬁculty keeping
                                                  her hands warm and was diagnosed with Raynaud’s phenomenon 5 years ago. Her past
                                                  medical history is signiﬁcant for acid reﬂux, dysphagia, and stomach ulcers. She also
                                                  has a long history of joint pains, and was previously given a diagnosis of ﬁbromyalgia.
                                                  The appearance of the patient’s hands is shown in Figure 9-5. Radiographs of the hands
                                                  reveal no arthritic changes but demonstrate a large calcium deposit that corresponds to
                                                  the lump felt by the patient. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                  WBC count: 11,000/mm3
                                                  Hemoglobin: 10 g/dL
                                                  Antinuclear antibody titer: 1:320
                                                  Anti-Scl 70 antibody: 27.01 U/mL

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                                  FIGURE 9-5.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS,
                                                  Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, Isselbacher J, et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
                                                  cine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 49-7).

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?       Scleroderma. This disease most commonly affects women ages 30–50
                                                                 years and has a prevalence of 240 cases per million. Both physical
                                                                 ﬁndings and laboratory tests are used to diagnose scleroderma.
                                                                 In scleroderma patients, antinuclear antibody (ANA) is positive
                                                                 in > 95% of patients. Anticentromere antibodies are positive in
                                                                 20–40% of patients and are associated with the CREST variation.
                                                                 Antitopoisomerase I (anti-scl-70) is found in 20–40% of patients and is
                                                                 associated with diffuse disease.

                       What is the pathogenesis of this         Scleroderma is caused by excessive production and deposition of type
                        condition?                               I and type III collagen by ﬁbroblasts, leading to tissue ﬁbrosis and
                                                                 occlusion of the microvasculature. While the etiology of scleroderma is
                                                                 unknown, studies point to a combination of environmental risk factors
                                                                 (e.g., viruses or toxin exposure) and genetic factors (MHC haplotypes
                                                                 DQ7 and DR2) as predisposing risk factors.

                      236
 How is this condition classiﬁed?   Major criterion:
                                      Sclerodactyly and skin changes (as seen in Figure 9-5) that may affect
                                       the entire extremity, face, neck, and trunk.
                                      Minor criteria:
                                        Sclerodactyly limited to the ﬁngers
                                        Digital pitting scars
                                        Bibasilar pulmonary ﬁbrosis

                                     Scleroderma is further classiﬁed based on the extent of involvement:
                                     Localized scleroderma is a cutaneous disease, while systemic sclerosis
                                     requires the involvement of internal organs. The most common
                                     limited type is CREST syndrome, which consists of Calcinosis,
                                     Raynaud’s phenomenon, Esophageal dysmotility, Sclerodactyly, and
                                     Telangiectasias.
 What is the most appropriate        Arthralgias: acetaminophen or NSAIDs.
  treatment for this condition?       Myositis: glucocorticoids (ﬁrst choice), methotrexate, and
                                       azathioprine.
                                      Pruritus: moisturizers, histamine1 (H1)- and histamine2 (H2)-
                                       blockers, tricyclic antidepressants.
                                      Pulmonary ﬁbrosis: cyclophosphamide.
                                      Raynaud’s phenomenon: calcium channel blockers, prazosin,
                                       reserpine, or topical nitrates; cervical sympathectomy is reserved for
                                       severe cases.
                                      Renal hypertension: angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors.

                                                                                                                M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                      Skin changes: D-penicillamine or methotrexate.

                                                                                                          237
                       CASE 14                    A 72-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of progressively
                                                   worsening exercise intolerance. He states that he has always been active, but over the
                                                   past 3 years he has been having more and more pain while walking. On walking four or
                                                   ﬁve blocks, he begins to experience discomfort in his lower back as well as numbness
                                                   and tingling that radiates down the back of his thighs and calves. The patient states
                                                   that these symptoms persist until he sits down and rests for awhile. Past medical history
                                                   is signiﬁcant for hypertension for which he takes losartan. On examination, his blood
                                                   pressure is 132/70 mm Hg, pulse is 73/min, and respiratory rate is 12/min. Motor
                                                   examination of the lower extremities reveals no weakness, but the patient has decreased
                                                   sensation to light touch in the S1 distribution, and his Achilles reﬂexes are diminished
                                                   bilaterally. Posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis pulses are 2+, and a straight leg raise test
                                                   (Lasègue’s sign) is negative bilaterally.

                       What conditions should be                 This patient is exhibiting signs and symptoms of claudication, which
                        considered in the differential            can be vasculogenic or neurogenic. Most patients develop vasculogenic
                        diagnosis?                                claudication secondary to atherosclerosis and peripheral artery
                                                                  disease. Neurogenic claudication is typically caused by degenerative
                                                                  spinal stenosis. Other causes include vasculitis, popliteal entrapment
                                                                  syndrome, and radiation ﬁbrosis.

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?        Neurogenic claudication due to degenerative spinal stenosis.
                                                                  Because peripheral vascular disease and spinal stenosis are
                                                                  both common in this age group, it is important that any patient

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                                                  presenting with claudication be worked up for both conditions.
                                                                  With normal peripheral pulses, this patient is unlikely to have
                                                                  peripheral vascular disease signiﬁcant enough to cause his
                                                                  presenting symptoms. While most cases of spinal stenosis are due
                                                                  to degenerative disease, other serious processes such as a bone or
                                                                  nerve tumor, infection, or vertebral fracture must be considered.
                                                                  Diagnostic imaging can help to establish the diagnosis.
                       How is this condition                     Neurogenic claudication must be differentiated from vascular
                        distinguished clinically from             claudication, as both are common and present similarly. Vascular
                        other conditions with a similar           claudication is associated with peripheral vascular disease and,
                        presentation?                             unlike neurogenic claudication, is marked by decreased or
                                                                  absent peripheral pulses, arterial bruits, foot pallor, and cyanosis.
                                                                  Vascular claudication is typically experienced after ambulating
                                                                  a certain distance and is relieved by rest, even in the upright
                                                                  position. Other symptoms such as impotence and dystrophic skin
                                                                  changes are often seen. In contrast, neurogenic claudication is
                                                                  associated with nerve impingement that occurs with prolonged
                                                                  upright posture. As in vascular claudication, ambulation can
                                                                  exacerbate these symptoms, but the key difference is that relief
                                                                  occurs with squatting, bending forward, or sitting rather than by
                                                                  simply resting.

                      238
 What is the most appropriate    X-ray of the lumbar spine will exhibit signs of degenerative disease.
  treatment for this condition?   MRI and/or CT scan of the lumbar spine can demonstrate the stenotic
                                  spinal canal. Treatment should always begin with a trial of conservative
                                  therapy, including analgesics and physical therapy. Long-term use
                                  of NSAIDs is relatively contraindicated in those > 65 years of age. If
                                  symptoms do not improve, epidural corticosteroid injections will often
                                  help to provide symptomatic relief. Surgical therapy is reserved for
                                  patients with refractory symptoms or with signs of rapidly progressing
                                  disease. Cauda equina syndrome (loss of bowel/bladder function,
                                  saddle anesthesia, present Babinski’s sign) is an emergency requiring
                                  immediate surgical intervention.

                                                                                                             M USC U LOSKE LETAL

                                                                                                      239
                       CASE 15                   A 23-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with complaints of
                                                  malaise, fever of 10 days’ duration, and swelling in her ankles and knees. She also has
                                                  been having chest pain, which is particularly painful on inspiration and expiration.
                                                  On questioning, the young woman states that she has always been healthy. She has
                                                  not had any recent sick contacts and has been in a monogamous relationship for the
                                                  past 3 years. Of note, her mother has Raynaud’s disease. On examination, the patient
                                                  is found to have no skin lesions or muscle tenderness. Her temperature is 38.1° C
                                                  (100.6° F). She has a pleural friction rub and signiﬁcant effusions around her ankles,
                                                  knees, and hands bilaterally. She also has palpable cervical and inguinal lymph nodes.
                                                  Radiography of her knees shows signiﬁcant soft tissue swelling. Relevant laboratory
                                                  ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                  WBC count: 11,000/mm3
                                                  Hemoglobin: 9.8 g/dL
                                                  Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 80 mm/hr
                                                  Rheumatoid factor: negative
                                                  Antinuclear antibody: positive (titer 1:160)
                                                  Anti-dsDNA antibody: positive (titer 1:320)
                                                  Anti-Sm antibody: negative
                                                  VDRL test: positive
                                                  Urinalysis: positive white cells, red cells, red cell casts; 4+ proteinuria

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?       Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). SLE is a chronic, multisystem

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                                                 autoimmune inﬂammatory disease of unknown etiology that typically
                                                                 affects the skin, joints, kidneys, lungs, nervous system, serous
                                                                 membranes, and/or other organs of the body. The clinical course of
                                                                 SLE is variable and may be characterized by periods of remissions and
                                                                 chronic or acute relapses. Ninety percent of cases occur in women,
                                                                 especially young African-American women in their 20s and 30s.

                       What other symptoms are                  Patients often present with nonspeciﬁc constitutional symptoms such as
                        common in patients with this             headache, fever, and anorexia. Joint pain and swelling occur early and
                        condition?                               are typically bilateral. The pain is commonly out of proportion to the
                                                                 physical ﬁndings. Other typical presenting signs and symptoms include
                                                                 a photosensitive malar butterﬂy rash over the cheeks and nose and
                                                                 ulcers of the mouth.

                      240
 What are the signs and symptoms   Patients who meet at least four of these criteria are likely to have SLE
  of this condition?                (recall the mnemonic DOPAMINE RASH):
                                    Discoid rash.
                                    Oral ulcers.
                                    Photosensitivity.
                                    Arthritis.
                                    Malar rash.
                                    Immunologic (anti-DNA, -Smith, or -phospholipid antibodies; false-
                                       positive VDRL).
                                    Neurologic symptoms (lupus cerebritis, seizures, headache).
                                    Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; not part of the American
                                       College of Rheumatology criteria for lupus).
                                    Renal disease.
                                    ANA positive.
                                    Serositis.
                                    Hematologic abnormalities.
                                    Serologic testing plays an important role in diagnosing SLE. The
                                    antinuclear antibody (ANA) test is the best diagnostic test for SLE
                                    and is positive (titer of ≥ 1:160) in almost all SLE patients. However,
                                    a positive ANA has a low speciﬁcity and positive predictive value
                                    because it may be positive in many other diseases. Other important
                                    autoantibodies associated with SLE are anti-double-stranded DNA
                                    (dsDNA) and anti-Smith antibodies, which have a lower sensitivity

                                                                                                               M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                    than ANA (66–90%) but have a high speciﬁcity (80–100%) and positive
                                    predictive value (89–100%).
 What is the most appropriate       Antimalarials are useful for skin manifestations and for
  treatment for this condition?       musculoskeletal complaints that do not adequately respond to
                                      NSAIDs. They may also protect against organ involvement and are
                                      now advised for most, if not all, patients with lupus.
                                     Immunosuppressive drugs are used in combination with
                                      glucocorticoids for treatment of advanced lupus with signiﬁcant
                                      systemic involvement, as in this patient with glomerulonephritis.
                                     NSAIDs are the treatment of choice for mild musculoskeletal
                                      complaints and mild serositis.
                                     Systemic corticosteroids are reserved for acute exacerbations and for
                                      patients with signiﬁcant organ system involvement, particularly renal
                                      and central nervous system disease.

                                                                                                       241
                       CASE 16                   A 13-year-old boy presents to the orthopedic surgeon’s ofﬁce because of right knee pain
                                                  of 8 months’ duration. The pain is deep and achy and is concentrated on the medial
                                                  side of the knee. Occasionally, the knee buckles while the patient is walking. Until
                                                  recently, the patient was able to engage in physical activity, but the pain is too severe
                                                  now. He has no history of trauma or injury and denies numbness, paresthesias, or
                                                  weakness in his right leg. He also denies fevers, chills, or recent illnesses. On physical
                                                  examination, he is an obese, young African-American boy in no apparent distress. The
                                                  patient’s right knee appears atraumatic on inspection, with no obvious inﬂammation or
                                                  effusion. The right knee is nontender to palpation. Examination of the hips revealed no
                                                  tenderness but is signiﬁcant for increased passive external rotation and decreased passive
                                                  internal rotation of the right hip compared to the left. Anteroposterior and lateral
                                                  radiographs of the patient’s right knee are normal. Lateral radiographs of the patient’s
                                                  right hip is shown in Figure 9-6.

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                                  FIGURE 9-6.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar
                                                  TR, Dunn DL, Hunter JG, Matthews JB, Pollock RE, Schwartz SI. Schwartz’s Principles of Sur-
                                                  gery, 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 42-82.)

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?       Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE). SCFE is caused by the
                                                                 displacement of the capital femoral epiphysis from the femoral neck
                                                                 through the growth plate. It is one of the most common hip disorders of
                                                                 adolescence and tends to occur during the time of peak linear growth.
                                                                 Males are more affected than females with a ratio of 1.5:1. Obesity is
                                                                 the most signiﬁcant risk factor, with 60% of all those affected measuring
                                                                 in the 90th percentile for weight (adjusted for age and sex). Other risk
                                                                 factors include African-American ethnicity, hypothyroidism, growth
                                                                 hormone deﬁciency, and Down syndrome. Approximately 15% of
                                                                 patients present with isolated thigh or knee pain, so physicians must
                                                                 have a high degree of suspicion to prevent a delay in diagnosis, which
                                                                 can worsen the prognosis.

                      242
 What symptoms are common in       The two most common presenting features of SCFE are pain and
  patients with this condition?     antalgic gait. Pain is typically localized to the groin, hip, thigh, and/
                                    or knee and is described as dull, deep, and difﬁcult to localize by
                                    palpation. The pain is often exacerbated by activity. There is usually no
                                    preceding history of trauma. In patients who present with knee or thigh
                                    pain, examination of these anatomical areas is typically unremarkable,
                                    as pain experienced by the patient is usually referred from the affected
                                    hip.
 What tests and/or imaging tools   Most cases of SCFE can be diagnosed using plain radiographs of the
  could be used to conﬁrm the       hip. At a minimum, anteroposterior (AP) and lateral views of the hips
  diagnosis?                        should be taken. Bilateral views are preferable because (1) SCFE
                                    often affects both hips, and (2) the contralateral hip serves as a point of
                                    comparison. Findings associated with SCFE on the AP view include
                                    widening, lucency, and irregularity of the growth plate. In the normal
                                    AP view, a line drawn along the superior femoral neck (Klein’s line; as
                                    in Figure 9-6) intersects the lateral portion of the femoral head. In a
                                    patient with SCFE, the line passes outside of the epiphysis or just at its
                                    superior edge.
 What is the most appropriate      Patients with acute SCFE should be hospitalized and put on bed rest
  treatment for this condition?     prior to deﬁnitive treatment. Treatment is focused on stabilization of
                                    the epiphysis to prevent further slippage. The gold standard treatment
                                    is pinning of the epiphysis to the femoral neck.

                                                                                                                  M USC U LOSKE LETAL

                                                                                                           243
                       CASE 17                   A 65-year-old woman is referred to an orthopedic surgeon by her primary care physician
                                                  for evaluation of right knee pain. Just 10 years ago, she was a competitive marathon
                                                  runner, but over the past 5 years the aches and pains in her joints have gradually begun
                                                  to limit her physical activity. The patient reports that she can walk only “about a half
                                                  mile” before the pain in her knee forces her to stop and rest. On examination, her right
                                                  knee has a moderate effusion but is not warm or erythematous. She has decreased
                                                  range of motion in her right knee relative to her left. Radiographs of the right knee show
                                                  osteophyte formation, subchondral bone cysts, and narrowing of the joint space. The
                                                  patient’s leukocyte count is 6000/mm3 and erythrocyte sedimentation rate is 8 mm/hr.

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?      Osteoarthritis (OA). OA is a chronic, noninﬂammatory, degenerative
                                                                process that affects the articular cartilage surfaces of the affected
                                                                joint(s). Because it is a mechanical wear and tear process, osteoarthritis
                                                                tends to affect the weight-bearing surfaces, especially the hips, knees,
                                                                and spine. This patient has classical ﬁndings of advanced age, slow
                                                                onset of symptoms, pain worse with exertion, and decreased range
                                                                of motion of the affected joint. Osteoarthritis also tends to be an
                                                                asymmetric process, affecting one joint more than its counterpart,
                                                                while rheumatoid arthritis tends to affect joints symmetrically. Primary
                                                                osteoarthritis is the most common cause of arthritis, with up to 80% of
                                                                people exhibiting some evidence of osteoarthritic changes by age 65.

                       What are the typical radiographic       Radiographs of the knees tend to show changes related to mechanical

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                        ﬁndings in this condition?              degeneration at the surface of the affected joint. Common ﬁndings
                                                                include joint space loss or narrowing, subchondral body sclerosis
                                                                (a reaction of the bone to increased bone-on-bone pressure caused by
                                                                loss of cartilage), and bone cyst formation. Bony osteophytes or bony
                                                                outgrowths on the margins of the joint surface are often seen as the
                                                                degenerative process continues. In the knee, the medial side tends
                                                                to bear more weight than the lateral side; thus, more degeneration is
                                                                typically seen medially.
                       What is the most appropriate            Conservative treatment should be the ﬁrst intervention and should
                        treatment for this condition?           focus on pain management and slowing the progression of the disease.
                                                                Such treatment includes the use of acetaminophen or NSAIDs for
                                                                analgesia, activity modiﬁcation (i.e., limiting activities that aggravate
                                                                symptoms the most), and the use of braces. Intra-articular steroid
                                                                injections are of little beneﬁt as this is not a condition marked or
                                                                caused by inﬂammation. In general, deﬁnitive intervention is surgical
                                                                and is attempted only after conservative treatment has failed. In such
                                                                cases, joint arthroplasty is often successful at both alleviating the
                                                                pain associated with this disease and restoring function lost due to
                                                                deterioration of the affected joint surfaces.

                      244
 CASE 18                   A 23-year-old Asian-American woman presents to her primary care physician with
                            cold hands and increasingly frequent episodes of headaches and lightheadedness. She
                            reports that the coldness in her hands is associated with numbness, tingling, and loss
                            of sensation in her arms. Two days ago, while reading a book at her desk, she reported
                            seeing ﬂashing lights followed by a loss of vision that lasted for about 15 seconds. She
                            denies head trauma, fever, night sweats, chills, or weight loss. She is not taking any
                            medications except for an occasional acetaminophen for her headaches. On physical
                            exam, her temperature is 39° C (100.5° F), pulse is 65/min, blood pressure is 140/90
                            mm Hg, and respiratory rate is 12/min. She has carotid bruits and faint pulses in her
                            arms bilaterally. Her hands are cold, with cyanotic nail beds. Her lungs are clear, and
                            her heart has a regular rate and rhythm. Abdominal examination is unremarkable.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Takayasu’s arteritis (TA). TA is a chronic inﬂammatory disease
                                          of medium and large arteries that usually affects the aorta and its
                                          branches. It is found commonly in young women of Asian descent.
                                          Other diseases to consider include carotid artery disease, Buerger’s
                                          disease, and ﬁbromuscular dysplasia. Buerger’s disease is found
                                          almost exclusively in smokers and males less than 40 years of age.
                                          Fibromuscular dysplasia is a hyperplastic arterial disease that affects
                                          medium and small arteries, generally the renal or carotid arteries, and
                                          can present similarly to TA.

 What other symptoms are                 Patients generally present with arm claudication, Raynaud’s

                                                                                                                       M USC U LOSKE LETAL
  common in patients with this            phenomenon, and constitutional symptoms (fever, arthralgias, weight
  condition?                              loss). Clinical suspicion for TA should be high in a young woman with
                                          carotid or clavicular bruits, asymmetric upper-extremity blood pressure
                                          measurements, hypertension, and faint or absent peripheral pulses.
 What tests and/or imaging tools         TA is conﬁrmed by arteriography showing irregular vessel walls and
  could be used to conﬁrm the             narrowing or occlusion of the aorta. MR arteriography can also be
  diagnosis?                              helpful in delineating the degree and distribution of arterial disease and
                                          is less invasive.
 What is the most appropriate            High-dose steroids are the ﬁrst-line therapy used to suppress the
  treatment for this condition?           inﬂammatory process of TA, and aggressive treatment is needed to
                                          prevent strokes. Disease refractory to glucocorticoid therapy can be
                                          treated with methotrexate or cyclophosphamide.

                                                                                                                 245
                       CASE 19                   A 65-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a severe headache
                                                  that has persisted for 2 weeks despite therapy with ibuprofen. The headache is localized
                                                  over the right temporal region. She is particularly worried since she rarely suffers from
                                                  headaches. The patient also notes that she has been experiencing discomfort while
                                                  attempting to eat over the past few days. She reports no history of trauma and denies
                                                  fever, night sweats, or chills; weight loss; photophobia; and visual disturbances. She is
                                                  taking no medication except for ibuprofen, which she has been taking for
                                                  1 year to treat what she describes as arthritis of the neck, shoulders, and elbows. The
                                                  patient’s temperature is 38° C (100.4° F), pulse is 90/min, blood pressure is 120/75
                                                  mm Hg, and respiratory rate is 12/min. On palpation of the patient’s right temporal
                                                  region, there is noticeable throbbing and tenderness but no signs of trauma to the
                                                  head. Ophthalmologic examination reveals equally round and reactive pupils and no
                                                  papilledema. Her chest is clear, and her heart has a normal rate and regular rhythm.
                                                  Abdominal examination is unremarkable. Relevant labs include the following:
                                                  ESR: 100 mm/hr
                                                  CRP: 3.0 mg/dL
                                                  MCV: 85 ﬂ
                                                  Hemoglobin: 9.0 g/dL
                                                  Platelet count: 500,000/L

                       What is the most likely diagnosis?       Temporal arteritis (TA), also known as giant cell arteritis. The onset
                                                                 of a new and severe headache in an older adult requires immediate

M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                                                 evaluation for TA, because untreated TA can lead to permanent
                                                                 vision loss stemming from occlusion of the ophthalmic artery. Other
                                                                 secondary causes of unilateral headaches are migranes, cluster
                                                                 headaches, trauma, and infection.

                       What is the pathophysiology of           Temporal arteritis is an inﬂammatory vasculitis that affects the
                        this condition?                          medium-sized arteries. It tends to occur in individuals > 60 years old,
                                                                 and affects females more often than males. TA can be associated with:
                                                                  Cherry red spot due to central retinal infarction (late ﬁnding).
                                                                  Decreased visual acuity.
                                                                  Elevated liver function tests.
                                                                  Orbital or frontotemporal head pain.
                                                                  Pain in the jaw or tongue while chewing.
                                                                  Pale and/or swollen optic disks (late ﬁnding).
                                                                  Retinal splinter hemorrhage (late ﬁnding).

                       What tests and/or imaging tools          The gold standard for diagnosis is a temporal artery biopsy. However,
                        could be used to conﬁrm the              20–30% of biopsies will be falsely negative due to the segmental nature
                        diagnosis?                               of the disease. In patients in whom there is a high index of suspicion,
                                                                 treatment should not be delayed for biopsy results. An elevated
                                                                 erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP)
                                                                 and abnormal blood count can help support the diagnosis. Up to half
                                                                 of all patients will have a normocytic, normochromic anemia and a
                                                                 thrombocytosis. In addition, 33% of patients will have an elevated
                                                                 alkaline phosphatase on liver function tests.
                       What is the most appropriate             TA is highly responsive to high-dose corticosteroids (60–80 mg
                        treatment for this condition?            prednisone per day). Typically, steroids given for 2–3 weeks will
                                                                 produce a dramatic improvement in symptoms, and improvements
                                                                 can be seen within the ﬁrst few days of treatment. For patients with
                                                                 evidence of advanced TA (ﬁxed visual loss and cherry red spot),
                                                                 intravenous steroids should be given for the ﬁrst 3 days before switching
                                                                 to oral steroids.

                      246
 CASE 20                   A 66-year-old woman presents to the rheumatologist’s ofﬁce complaining of muscle
                            aching, weakness in her upper arms and thighs, and severe fatigue. She also notes
                            an unintentional weight loss of 2.3 kg (5 lb) over the past 6 months. The patient’s
                            symptoms are most severe in the morning and so debilitating that she can barely get
                            dressed. The patient denies any history of trauma or arthritis. She also denies fevers,
                            headache, and jaw claudication. On physical examination, the patient is tender to
                            palpation along her shoulder girdle bilaterally as well as her trunk. The patient has a
                            normal neuromuscular examination and no obvious signs of inﬂammation in any of her
                            joints. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                            WBC count: 7.2/mm3
                            RBC count 10,300/mm3
                            Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 85 mm/hr
                            C-reactive protein: 10.1 mg/L
                            Rheumatoid factor: negative
                            Antinuclear antibody: negative
                            CPK: normal

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR). PMR is a clinical syndrome
                                          characterized by severe aching and stiffness in the neck, shoulder
                                          girdle, and pelvic girdle. This condition has a prevalence of 1% and
                                          rarely affects patients < 50 years old. It is more commonly seen in
                                          whites. Fifteen percent of patients with PMR will also have temporal

                                                                                                                      M USC U LOSKE LETAL
                                          arteritis (TA), and 50% of patients with TA will have PMR.

 What other symptoms are                 The classical presentation of PMR is proximal muscle pain and
  common in patients with this            weakness. Patients will typically complain of subacute or chronic
  condition?                              symmetric aching and morning stiffness in the shoulders, hips, neck,
                                          and torso. In addition, they usually have difﬁculties with daily life
                                          activities such as dressing in the morning (e,g., pulling a sweater over
                                          their head or putting on stockings) and brushing their hair. In a patient
                                          with PMR, headaches or high spiking fevers should alert the physician
                                          to the possibility of TA.
 What are the typical laboratory         As with TA, PMR is associated with an elevated erythrocyte
  and radiographic ﬁndings in this        sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein. Typically, the ESR
  condition?                              is between 60 and 100 mm/hr, but values below 40 mm/hr can still
                                          be consistent with PMR. Plain radiographs of affected areas will rarely
                                          reveal any abnormalities. However, MRI of such areas will conﬁrm the
                                          inﬂammation of extra-articular structures that is associated with this
                                          condition.
 What is the most appropriate            PMR is remarkably responsive to low-dose corticosteroids. Note that
  treatment for this condition?           high-dose corticosteroids will be required if TA is also present.

                                                                                                               247
      M USC U LOSKE LETAL

248

                            N OT E S
Neurology

Case 1      250

Case 2      252

Case 3      254

Case 4      256

Case 5      258

Case 6      260

Case 7      262

Case 8      264

Case 9      266

Case 10     267

Case 11     268

Case 12     269

Case 13     270

Case 14     272

Case 15     275

Case 16     276

Case 17     278

Case 18     281

Case 19     282

Case 20     284

Case 21     286

Case 22     288

Case 23     290

                  249
                CASE 1                    A 50-year-old left-hand-dominant man presents to his primary care physician with
                                           complaints of right hand weakness. He says 6 months ago he began dropping things
                                           with his right hand. In the subsequent months, his grip strength has weakened further
                                           and his handwriting has deteriorated. He has also noticed frequent twitching in the
                                           muscles of his right hand, forearm, and shoulder, and he has developed painful muscle
                                           cramps in his neck and back. He also reports occasional problems swallowing his
                                           food and says his speech seems “thicker.” The patient reports no other signiﬁcant past
                                           medical history and denies any lower extremity disturbances or sensory deﬁcits. Vital
                                           signs are within normal limits. The patient’s cranial nerve examination is signiﬁcant
                                           for atrophy of the tongue, which also demonstrates fasciculations upon protrusion. On
                                           motor exam, the patient has signiﬁcant thenar atrophy of the right hand, but not on the
                                           left. Right hand strength is 3/5, and left hand strength is 4/5. Triceps and biceps are 4+/5
                                           bilaterally and deltoids are 5/5 bilaterally. Neuromuscular examination of the lower
                                           extremities is normal. Reﬂexes are 3+ in the upper extremities bilaterally and he also
                                           has a brisk jaw jerk reﬂex. Sensory examination is normal. The patient’s gait is normal,
                                           and he exhibits no ataxia.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). ALS is a neurodegenerative
                                                          disorder that causes progressive muscle weakness and disability.
                                                          ALS follows a relentless course and eventually leads to death, with
                                                          dysphagia and respiratory muscle weakness causing recurrent aspiration
                                                          pneumonias and culminating in overt respiratory failure. This disease
                                                          typically affects patients between 40 and 60 years old. Men are affected
                                                          more often than women. Most cases of ALS are idiopathic, but 5–10%

N E U ROLOGY
                                                          of cases are familial and follow an autosomal dominant inheritance
                                                          pattern.

                What causes this condition?              The etiology of the neurodegeneration in ALS is currently unknown.
                                                          Signs and symptoms result from the death of motor neurons in the
                                                          spinal cord (anterior horn cells) and brain stem, the descending
                                                          corticospinal tracts, and motor regions of the frontal cortex. Because
                                                          ALS damages both the corticospinal tracts and the motor neurons,
                                                          patients exhibit a combination of upper motor neuron (UMN) and
                                                          lower motor neuron (LMN) signs:
                                                           UMN signs:
                                                             Weakness; affects groups of muscles.
                                                             Hyperreﬂexia and hypertonia.
                                                             Spasticity; predominant in the antigravity musculature (i.e., ﬂexors
                                                               in the upper extremities and extensors in the lower extremities).
                                                             Extensor plantar responses (Babinski’s sign).
                                                           LMN signs:
                                                             Weakness; affects single muscle ﬁbers.
                                                             Atrophy.
                                                             Fasciculations.
                                                             Hyporeﬂexia or areﬂexia.

               250
 What is the typical presentation of   Early in the disease, ALS can be difﬁcult to diagnose as symptoms
  this condition?                       can be very subtle. Patients with early ALS usually present with focal
                                        motor weakness, often in an arm. This weakness can be accompanied
                                        by a combination of both UMN and LMN signs, but atrophy of
                                        intrinsic hand muscles and fasciculations may be the only early signs.
                                        As the disease progresses, hyperreﬂexia and spasticity of the limb
                                        often develops, and eventually the disease involves other limbs, the
                                        neck, tongue, and pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles. About 25% of
                                        patients present initially with bulbar symptoms such as slurred speech
                                        and difﬁculty swallowing. Notably, sensory deﬁcits are not part of this
                                        disease. The diagnosis of ALS requires electromyography (EMG),
                                        which demonstrates widespread denervation in at least three limbs.
                                        EMG ﬁndings of denervation include giant motor unit potentials,
                                        polyphasic motor unit potentials, and ﬁbrillations.
 What other condition may have a       There is a signiﬁcant overlap between ALS and frontotemporal
  similar presentation?                 dementia (FTD). As many as 15% of patients with FTD meet deﬁnite
                                        criteria for ALS. These patients develop cognitive deﬁcits resulting
                                        from the loss of frontal and temporal cortical neurons. This leads to
                                        impairment of executive functioning, behavior, and memory.

                                                                                                                  N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                            251
                CASE 2                      An 80-year-old woman is brought to her physician by her daughter for a medication
                                             check. During the visit, the patient has trouble answering questions about events
                                             that took place in the past month, and at one point stops to ask her daughter where
                                             she is. Her daughter comments that she has recently been disoriented in familiar
                                             environments, that she has trouble coming up with the names of people and objects,
                                             and that she recently forgot to turn off the stove at home, setting off the ﬁre alarm. Her
                                             temperature is 36.5°C (97.7°F), with a heart rate of 90/min and a blood pressure of
                                             130/80 mm Hg. Neurologic examination reveals no focal deﬁcits, but she scores a 22/30
                                             on the Mini-Mental State Examination, losing points because she is not oriented to the
                                             date or day of the week, is unable to recall words that she has been asked to remember
                                             after a brief delay, and is unable to copy a simple ﬁgure.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?         Dementia. Dementia is deﬁned as a chronic progressive decline
                                                            in multiple areas of cognitive functioning that impairs activities of
                                                            daily living. Memory is most commonly affected, but there are also
                                                            language, problem-solving, mood, and neuropsychiatric deﬁcits. This
                                                            patient’s prominent deﬁcits in memory, naming, and visuospatial
                                                            processing are most consistent with a diagnosis of dementia of the
                                                            Alzheimer type.

                What are the most common                   Dementia may be due to a primary neurodegenerative process (primary
                 causes of this condition?                  dementia) or due to other medical conditions (secondary dementia),
                                                            the latter of which may be reversible if the medical condition can
                                                            be treated early enough (e.g., vitamin B12 deﬁciency). The most

N E U ROLOGY
                                                            common cause of primary dementia in the United States is Alzheimer’s
                                                            disease (AD); vascular demetia is the next most common, followed by
                                                            dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
                What are the most common                    D: Drug toxicity (sedatives, analgesics, polypharmacy).
                 potentially reversible causes of            E: Ethanol.
                 this condition?                             M: Metabolic (hypothyroidism, hepatic or renal disease).
                                                             E: Environmental (chronic heavy metal poisoning, sensory
                                                              deprivation due to hearing or vision loss).
                                                             N: Nutritional (thiamine, vitamin B12 deﬁciency).
                                                             N: Normal pressure hydrocephalus.
                                                             T: Tumor (especially in the frontotemporal lobe).
                                                             T: Trauma (dementia pugilistica, chronic subdural hematoma).
                                                             I: Infection (HIV, syphilis).
                                                             A: Affective disorders (depression, schizophrenia).

                What diagnostic tests should be            The diagnostic workup should try to identify any reversible causes
                 performed?                                 based on presenting symptoms and history. Screening should be
                                                            performed for common disorders like depression and alcoholism.
                                                            Routine laboratory tests such as a complete blood count, electrolyte
                                                            panel, thyroid and liver function tests, and vitamin B12 levels should
                                                            also be pursued when a new patient presents with dementia. If not
                                                            documented, screening for syphilis and HIV may be appropriate.
                                                            Imaging with CT or MRI is recommended, particularly if the exam
                                                            reveals focal neurological deﬁcits.

               252
 What management options are         Available medical treatments include acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
 available for this patient and her   (e.g., donepezil) and NMDA-receptor antagonists (e.g., memantine),
 daughter?                            both of which have been shown to slow progression in mild to
                                      moderate cases of dementia. Depression can often exacerbate
                                      cognitive symptoms and should be treated to improve both mentation
                                      and quality of life. Efforts should also be made to reduce caretaker
                                      “burnout.”

                                                                                                             N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                       253
                CASE 3                      An 18-year-old man is brought to the emergency department (ED) by his mother for
                                             “increasing sleepiness.” His mother relates that he has been having fevers over the past
                                             week up to 38.6°C (101.4°F), which were reduced with acetaminophen. The last two
                                             days he has had headaches, and this morning began experiencing signiﬁcant nausea
                                             and vomiting. She attributed his symptoms to gastroenteritis until he began having
                                             trouble using his left arm and became progressively more somnolent. He has no sick
                                             contacts but did have an upper respiratory tract infection about 5 weeks ago. His past
                                             medical history is signiﬁcant for mild asthma and frequent sinusitis. His sinusitis usually
                                             resolves with oxymetazoline and saline nasal sprays. Several times over the past few
                                             years he has required antibiotics for chronic sinusitis. On physical examination, the
                                             patient is able to answer some basic questions but has difﬁculty keeping his eyes open.
                                             His neck is supple. His neurologic exam demonstrates bilateral papilledema and 2/5
                                             strength in his left arm and leg. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head with
                                             contrast reveals a ring-enhancing lesion adjacent to the superior aspect of the right
                                             frontal and temporal bones, without evidence of a bony defect. Laboratory ﬁndings are
                                             as follows:
                                             White blood cells: 18,900/mm3
                                             Red blood cells: 41,100/mm3
                                             Platelets: 302,000/mm3

                What are the next immediate                His symptoms of headache, nausea, vomiting, and focal neurologic
                 steps in this patient’s workup?            deﬁcits in combination with signs of infection are concerning for
                                                            intracranial pyogenic infection, which in this case turned out to be an
                                                            epidural abscess. With a mass lesion identiﬁed, a neurosurgery consult

N E U ROLOGY
                                                            is the next best step. Immediate administration of antibiotics and
                                                            surgical management of the intracranial abscess are imperative for a
                                                            positive outcome in this case.

                What factors contributed to this           His history of sinusitis is the most likely contributing factor to his
                 patient’s presentation?                    disease. Four pairs of air-ﬁlled sinuses are present in the adult. The
                                                            ethmoid and maxillary sinuses are present and clinically signiﬁcant
                                                            at birth, while the sphenoid and frontal sinuses develop as the child
                                                            grows. Obstruction of the ostia draining the frontal, maxillary, and
                                                            anterior sphenoid sinuses, which commonly occurs during upper
                                                            respiratory tract infections, can facilitate overgrowth of native bacterial
                                                            ﬂora manifesting as acute sinusitis. The peak incidence of epidural
                                                            abscesses secondary to sinusitis occurs in adolescence and is more
                                                            common in males.
                What organisms are probably                Microorganisms responsible for acute sinusitis are primarily native
                 responsible for this patient’s             nasopharyngeal ﬂora: Streptococcus pneumoniae, Moraxella, and
                 disease?                                   nontypable Haemophilus inﬂuenzae. Anaerobes can be seen in chronic
                                                            sinusitis, so appropriate antibiotic coverage for this patient would be
                                                            broad until susceptibilities are available.
                How would his infection have               Spread of infection usually occurs via progressive thrombophlebitis
                 reached the epidural space?                through the diploic veins (valveless veins draining through the cranial
                                                            bone). One explanation for the prevalence of this disease in adolescent
                                                            males is the increased vascularity of the diploe in that age group. Other
                                                            mechanisms include direct passage through a bony defect caused by
                                                            osteomyelitis, trauma, or surgery.

               254
 What other complications related    Ophthalmological complications, most commonly arising from
  to paranasal sinusitis can occur?   infection in the ethmoid sinuses, present with chemosis and periorbital
                                      edema. Orbital cellulitis and subperiosteal abscess of the orbit are
                                      distinguished from preseptal cellulitis (infection of structures anterior
                                      to orbit) by decreased vision, range of extraocular movement, and
                                      proptosis. Other intracranial complications include cavernous venous
                                      thrombosis, brain abscess, and osteomyelitis of the frontal bone (Pott’s
                                      puffy tumor).

                                                                                                                  N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                           255
                CASE 4                     An 18-year-old woman is brought to the emergency department by ambulance after a
                                            motor vehicle accident. The patient was alert when the paramedics arrived at the scene,
                                            but her level of consciousness declined en route to the hospital. The patient told the
                                            paramedics she was unrestrained and had hit her windshield during the collision. On
                                            presentation the patient is drowsy but responsive to verbal commands. She complains
                                            of back and neck pain and a headache. There is a contusion and abrasion over her right
                                            temporal region; the remainder of her head, ear, eye, nose, and throat examination is
                                            normal. Neurological examination reveals no focal deﬁcits, and cranial nerves II–XII
                                            are intact. Vital signs, a complete blood count, and blood chemistry test results are
                                            within normal limits. A lateral x-ray of the cervical spine reveals no abnormalities.
                                            Noncontrast CT scan of the head shows a small skull fracture in the temporal region
                                            and an underlying extra-axial lenticular hyperdensity.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Epidural hematoma (EDH). EDH is an accumulation of blood
                                                          between the inner table of the skull and the dural membrane. In a
                                                          patient with a history of blunt head trauma, radiographic evidence of
                                                          a temporal bone fracture, and an underlying lens-shaped collection of
                                                          blood, EDH is the most likely diagnosis. Because the underlying brain
                                                          has usually been spared from injury, prognosis is excellent if treated
                                                          quickly and aggressively.

                What are the typical clinical            Trauma that causes an EDH sometimes results in a transient episode of
                 ﬁndings associated with this             altered consciousness immediately following the initial impact, followed
                 condition?                               by a lucid interval prior to a subsequent decline in consciousness (from

N E U ROLOGY
                                                          the enlarging hematoma). Patients may progress to coma by the time
                                                          they receive medical attention. Other common presenting signs and
                                                          symptoms include headache, seizure, and nausea/vomiting.
                What other symptoms are                  As with all expanding space-occupying lesions, increasing intracranial
                 common in patients with this             pressure can lead to brain herniation and possible death. Signs of
                 condition?                               increasing intracranial pressure and herniation include the following:
                                                           A triad of hypertension, bradycardia, and respiratory irregularities,
                                                            (Cushing’s triad).
                                                           Cranial nerve III and/or VI palsy.
                                                           Dilated, sluggish, or ﬁxed pupils.
                                                           Papilledema secondary to impaired axonal transport and congestion
                                                            of the optic nerve.
                                                           Periorbital bruising.

                What risk factors are associated         The mortality rate for EDH is 5–40%, with increased mortality
                 with a worse prognosis?                  associated with the presence of the following:
                                                           Advanced age.
                                                           Increased hematoma volume.
                                                           Increased intracranial pressure.
                                                           Intradural lesions.
                                                           Lower Glasgow Coma Scale rating.
                                                           Pupillary abnormalities.
                                                           Rapid clinical progression.
                                                           Temporal location.

               256
 What is the most appropriate    Initial management focuses on hemodynamic and respiratory
  treatment for this condition?   stabilization. Deﬁnitive surgery (craniotomy and excavation of the
                                  underlying hematoma) may be required; burr hole placement at
                                  bedside in rare cases may be necessary in setting of imminent death
                                  from herniation.

                                                                                                          N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                    257
                CASE 5                        A 70-year-old Asian woman presents to the emergency department complaining
                                               of extreme pain in her right eye and blurred vision. The pain began suddenly that
                                               morning and got progressively worse during her drive to the hospital; she vomited once
                                               and reports continued nausea. The blurred vision began with the pain and is in only
                                               her right eye. She is a retired radiologist with no signiﬁcant past medical history. On
                                               physical examination, she is in severe discomfort, with her hand over her right eye. Her
                                               eye is hard and red; the pupil is 6 mm dilated and reacts poorly to light. Visual acuity is
                                               20/200 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left. The remainder of her exam, including that
                                               of the left eye, is unremarkable.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?           Closed-angle glaucoma. This is an optic neuropathy due to narrowing
                                                              or closure of the anterior chamber angle that prevents adequate
                                                              drainage of the aqueous humor from the eye and leads to elevated
                                                              intraocular pressure (typically over 30 mm Hg, normal 8–21 mm Hg).
                                                              This is a medical emergency that must be addressed within 24 hours to
                                                              prevent blindness.

                How can the diagnosis be                     She will need an immediate ophthalmology consult for evaluation and
                 conﬁrmed?                                    treatment. Her exam will include the following components:
                                                               Gonioscopy: gold-standard for the diagnosis of angle closure; involves
                                                                 use of a special lens with a slit lamp.
                                                               Slit lamp exam of anterior segments: can be used to estimate anterior
                                                                 chamber depth; not as reliable as gonioscopy.
                                                               Measurement of intraocular pressure.

N E U ROLOGY
                What is the epidemiology of this             Closed-angle glaucoma is the leading cause of glaucoma blindness
                 condition?                                   worldwide; in the United States, it constitutes ~10% of cases of
                                                              glaucoma. Patients have an anatomic predisposition to the condition;
                                                              risk factors include:
                                                               Family history of angle closure.
                                                               Advanced age.
                                                               Female > male.
                                                               Asian or Inuit ethnicity.
                                                               Pupillary dilation (prolonged time in the dark, stress, medications).
                                                               Anterior uveitis.
                                                               Lens dislocation.

                What is the most appropriate                 Treatment involves rapidly decreasing the intraocular pressure and
                 treatment for this patient?                  reversal of angle closure. Systemic acetazolamide is given, followed by
                                                              topical pilocarpine or timolol eye drops. This will typically reduce the
                                                              intraocular pressure and improve the patient’s symptoms. Deﬁnitive
                                                              treatment involves laser iridotomy, which creates a hole in the iris and
                                                              allows drainage of the aqueous humor. The fellow eye should also be
                                                              examined, as prophylaxis may be needed to prevent angle closure.

               258
 What is the other common form        Open-angle glaucoma. This is the most common type of glaucoma
  of this condition, and how does it   in the United States. Patients are typically older blacks with diabetes
  present?                             and myopia who present with peripheral visual ﬁeld loss progressing
                                       to central ﬁeld loss. Intraocular pressure is typically elevated, and
                                       the optic disc shows characteristic “cupping” on funduscopic exam.
                                       Symptoms are usually minor, and at-risk patients should be screened
                                       carefully to avoid missing the diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate         Prevention is key for open-angle glaucoma, as visual ﬁeld loss cannot
  treatment for this condition?        be reversed. Topical medications such as timolol and pilocarpine can
                                       decrease intraocular pressure. Laser trabeculoplasty can open the
                                       diseased trabecular network and allow aqueous drainage.

                                                                                                                  N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                            259
                CASE 6                    A 45-year-old man is brought to the emergency department following a generalized
                                           convulsive episode witnessed by strangers. He was subsequently observed to be in a
                                           confused state, having lost continence of bowel and bladder. When the paramedics
                                           bring him to the hospital, he is more lucid but his language ability seems impaired. He
                                           states that he has noticed progressive difﬁculty comprehending conversations, and that
                                           he sometimes mispronounces words or uses the wrong words. He says he has also been
                                           suffering from general malaise and a dull headache. In the past several weeks he has
                                           had several episodes of “lost time” in which he loses awareness, followed by a transient
                                           disorientation; he has no memory of what occurs during these episodes. The patient
                                           denies any fever, chills, night sweats, or recent illness and has no relevant past medical
                                           history. He smokes half a pack of cigarettes per day and drinks socially on occasion. On
                                           examination, the patient is well appearing and in no acute distress. His vital signs are
                                           stable and his CBC and blood chemistry studies are unremarkable. HEENT, cranial
                                           nerve, and neurological examinations reveal no abnormalities or focal deﬁcits. Results
                                           of T2- (Figure 10-1A) and enhanced T1-weighted (Figure 10-1B) MRI are shown.

N E U ROLOGY

                                                  A                                      B

                                           FIGURE 10-1 A & B.         (Reproduced, with permission, from Ropper AH, Brown RH.
                                           Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurology, 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 31-2.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). GBM is the most common primary
                                                          brain tumor in adults. It is also the most malignant of the primary
                                                          tumors and has a mean survival of 3 months without therapy and 1
                                                          year with optimum therapy. In younger patients (< 45 years old), GBM
                                                          tends to occur because of malignant degeneration of a lower-grade
                                                          astrocytoma. In older patients, GBM arises de novo as a primary tumor.
                                                          GBM is the most undifferentiated of the astrocytic subset of glial brain
                                                          tumors.

               260
 What conditions should be           Other tumors:
  included in the differential          Brain metastases
  diagnosis?                            CNS lymphoma
                                        Anaplastic astrocytoma
                                        Oligodendroglioma
                                      Infection:
                                        Brain abscess
                                        Encephalitis
                                      Vascular lesions:
                                        Intracerebral hemorrhage
                                        Arteriovenous malformation

 What is the typical presentation   GBM most commonly presents with a progressive neurological deﬁcit
  of this condition?                 related to the area of brain where the tumor is located. As seen in
                                     Figure 10-1, this patient has a large tumor deep within the left cerebral
                                     hemisphere and extending through the corpus callosum, and presented
                                     with aphasia. Other common presenting signs and symptoms include
                                     headache (worse in the morning), seizure, and changes in mental status
                                     or personality. GBM is an aggressive tumor that grows quickly; most
                                     patients are diagnosed with GBM within 6 months of symptom onset.
 How is this condition diagnosed    GBM typically consists of poorly differentiated, pleomorphic astrocytic
  histologically?                    cells with marked nuclear atypia and brisk mitotic activity. Necrosis
                                     is also an essential diagnostic criterion for GBM. Immunostaining is
                                     positive for glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein, vimentin, and ﬁbronectin.

                                                                                                                 N E U ROLOGY
 What is the most appropriate       Treatment of GBM is difﬁcult since no current therapy is considered
  treatment for this condition?      curative. At this point, treatment of GBM is palliative and utilizes a
                                     combination of radiation, chemotherapy, and surgery.

                                                                                                         261
                CASE 7                     An 18-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of leg
                                            weakness. One week ago the patient was ill with fever, nausea, and diarrhea, but the
                                            symptoms resolved 2 days prior to admission. The patient ﬁrst noticed that something
                                            was wrong upon waking up this morning, when she nearly fell over after getting out
                                            of bed. She says she cannot walk without support and that as the day has progressed,
                                            her arms have also begun to feel weak. She has also developed pain in the lower back
                                            and legs as well as a bothersome tingling sensation in the feet. The patient denies any
                                            headache, blurred vision, tinnitus, or vertigo, but has had mild weakness in the face
                                            and has noticed that her speech is becoming more slurred. She is not experiencing
                                            any bowel or bladder incontinence. On presentation, the patient is a well-nourished
                                            teenager who appears nervous. Vital signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F),
                                            a heart rate of 72/min, a respiratory rate of 22/min, and a blood pressure of 100/64
                                            mm Hg. HEENT, heart, lung, and abdomen examinations are normal. Her cranial
                                            nerve examination demonstrates mild facial diplegia and dysarthria. She has 3/5
                                            strength in the lower extremities bilaterally and 4/5 strength in the upper extremities.
                                            Deep tendon reﬂexes are absent throughout. Brachial, posterior tibial, and dorsalis pedis
                                            pulses are 2+ bilaterally. CBC, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose,
                                            calcium, and liver function tests are normal. Urine toxicology screen is negative. A
                                            lumbar puncture is performed; opening pressure is normal. CSF analysis shows a
                                            protein level of 146 mg/dL, glucose of 70 mg/dL, and no WBCs or RBCs. Gram stain
                                            demonstrates no WBCs and no organisms.

                What conditions should be                 The differential for an individual presenting with rapidly progressing
                 considered in the differential            ﬂaccid quadriparesis includes:

N E U ROLOGY
                 diagnosis?                                 Acute HIV seroconversion
                                                            Acute myelopathy
                                                            Botulism
                                                            Collagen vascular disease
                                                            Diphtheria
                                                            Guillain-Barré syndrome
                                                            Heavy metal intoxication
                                                            Hexane inhalation
                                                            Hypophosphatemia and hypomagnesemia
                                                            Lyme disease
                                                            Myasthenia gravis
                                                            Poliomyelitis
                                                            Porphyria
                                                            Tick paralysis

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute inﬂammatory
                                                           demyelinating polyneuropathy of the peripheral nervous system
                                                           characterized by progressive ﬂaccid weakness. Weakness typically
                                                           ﬁrst develops in the lower extremities and may eventually spread
                                                           proximally to involve the trunk, upper extremities, and, in severe cases,
                                                           respiratory and bulbar muscles. This pattern of ascending paralysis is
                                                           fairly symmetric and develops over a period of days or weeks. There is a
                                                           slight male predominance of 1.5:1 and the disease occurs in 1 of every
                                                           100,000 people every year.

               262
 What criteria are used to diagnose   Typical history ﬁndings include the following:
  this condition?                       Ophthalmoplegia, associated with the Miller Fisher variant, may
                                         manifest as a complaint of double vision.
                                        Pain is often the initial complaint in young children.
                                        Weakness or ataxia, often within 2–4 weeks of a viral illness.

                                       Typical physical ﬁndings include the following:
                                        Areﬂexia is a hallmark of GBS. Proximal reﬂexes are sometimes
                                         present early in the presentation of the disease.
                                        Areﬂexia, ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia are a triad of symptoms
                                         associated with the Miller Fisher variant.
                                        Ascending motor weakness.
                                        Autonomic dysfunction manifests as orthostatic hypotension,
                                         pupillary dysfunction, sweating abnormalities, and sinus tachycardia.
                                        Cranial nerve ﬁndings, particularly facial weakness and dysarthria,
                                         may be observed.
                                       Typical laboratory ﬁndings include the following:
                                        Abnormal nerve conduction study ﬁndings (including prolonged
                                         distal motor latencies, F waves, and conduction block).
                                        Albuminocytologic dissociation on CSF evaluation (high protein
                                         count with a low cell count) is highly suggestive of GBS.
                                        GBS-associated antibodies such as GQ1B (for the Miller Fisher
                                         variant) and GM1 (for Campylobacter jejuni–associated GBS).
                                        Stool culture positive for C. jejuni (approximately 1/1000 C. jejuni
                                         infections results in GBS).

                                                                                                                  N E U ROLOGY
 What is the most appropriate         The mainstay of therapy is immunomodulation by administering either
  treatment for this condition?        intravenous immunoglobulins or plasmapheresis. Both therapies are
                                       proven to slow or halt the progression of the disease and hasten the
                                       recovery of lost motor function. The patients most likely to beneﬁt are
                                       those who present with moderate or severe progressive weakness and
                                       those who are unable to walk, have a rapidly progressive course, or
                                       have bulbar paralysis and impending respiratory distress. More severe
                                       cases of GBS (30%) may require mechanical ventilation in addition
                                       to immunomodulation. Patients with mild symptoms or patients
                                       who present weeks after symptom onset are less likely to beneﬁt. For
                                       such patients, supportive care including nursing and respiratory care,
                                       physical therapy, and adequate nutrition are usually sufﬁcient. Overall,
                                       children have a better prognosis than adults.

                                                                                                           263
                CASE 8                     A 27-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician complaining of recurrent
                                            headaches that started in puberty, but have recently become more frequent, now
                                            occurring approximately three times a month. She describes the pain as throbbing,
                                            focused over the left temple, and accompanied by nausea, occasional vomiting, and
                                            sensitivity to bright lights and loud noises. Upon further questioning, she admits to
                                            seeing ﬂashing lights in her right lower visual ﬁeld approximately 1 hour before the
                                            headache begins. Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37°C (98.6°F), a heart
                                            rate of 80/min, a respiratory rate of 12/min, and a blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg. A
                                            neurologic examination shows no focal deﬁcits.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Migraine with aura (old term: classic migraine). This patient most
                                                          likely has a primary headache disorder due to the chronic presentation
                                                          and lack of focal neurologic ﬁndings. She fulﬁlls the diagnostic criteria
                                                          for migraine, and the presence of an aura rules out the more prevalent
                                                          disorder of migraine without aura (old term: common migraine). Peak
                                                          onset occurs in adolescence.

                What conditions should be                Two other primary headache disorders include tension and cluster
                 included in the differential             headaches. Tension headaches are bilateral, of mild to moderate
                 diagnosis?                               intensity, and unaffected by physical activity. Patients associate them
                                                          with a feeling of pressure or tightness. Cluster headaches are unilateral,
                                                          severe, and occur in groups ranging from every other day to up to eight
                                                          times a day. They are associated with autonomic phenomena such as
                                                          conjunctival injection, lacrimation, and nasal congestion. They are

N E U ROLOGY
                                                          more common in men than women.
                                                          There are many secondary causes of headache, including subarachnoid
                                                          hemorrhage, temporal arteritis, tumor, malignant hypertension,
                                                          narrow-angle glaucoma, meningitis, and analgesic rebound (or
                                                          medication overuse) headache.
                What are the diagnostic criteria?        To make the diagnosis of migraine, a patient must have recurrent
                                                          headaches lasting hours to days with at least two of the following
                                                          characteristics:
                                                           Aggravated by physical activity
                                                           Moderate to severe intensity
                                                           Pulsating quality
                                                           Unilateral location

                                                          AND at least one of the following:
                                                           Nausea and/or vomiting
                                                           Photophobia or phonophobia

                                                          As in this patient, the aura is most commonly a visual disturbance.
                                                          It precedes the headache by an interval of ≤ 60 minutes, develops
                                                          gradually, and is fully reversible.

               264
 What is the most appropriate      Initiate abortive therapy at the ﬁrst sign of pain. High-dose nonsteroidal
  treatment for this condition?     anti-inﬂammatory drug (NSAID) therapy can be successful, especially
                                    if paired with an antiemetic or promotility agent such as phenergan or
                                    metoclopramide. The most speciﬁc (and expensive) relief for migraine
                                    comes from the triptans (e.g., sumatriptan), a family of selective
                                    agonists for the serotonin 1D receptor. In the emergency department
                                    setting, alternative abortive agents include IV steroids, antiepileptics
                                    (e.g., divalproex) and ergots (dihydroergotamine).
 What are the prevention options   Prophylactic therapy can decrease migraine frequency and severity.
  for this patient?                 Options include antihypertensives (particularly β-blockers and calcium
                                    channel blockers), antidepressants (e.g., tricyclic antidepressants),
                                    and antiepileptics (e.g., valproic acid and topiramate). In addition,
                                    patients should avoid potential triggers; common triggers include
                                    dietary (red wine, sharp cheeses), hormonal (estrogens or menses),
                                    and environmental (perfumes, lack of sleep, letdown period after high
                                    stress).

                                                                                                                 N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                          265
                CASE 9                    A woman brings her 50-year-old father to a neurologist after being referred by his
                                           psychiatrist. He is belligerent, making inappropriate comments, and occasionally
                                           experiencing auditory hallucinations. His behavioral problems developed a few years
                                           ago and were initially attributed to a substance abuse problem. However, a recent
                                           examination by his psychiatrist showed rhythmic, repetitive grimacing and blinking,
                                           with occasional rapid, jerky, dancelike movements of his right arm. The daughter says
                                           that she remembers her grandfather having similar symptoms and that he committed
                                           suicide when she was a child. Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37°C
                                           (98.6°F), a heart rate of 80/min, and a blood pressure of 145/90 mm Hg.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Huntington’s disease (HD). HD is an autosomal dominant
                                                         neurodegenerative disorder with prominent psychiatric components,
                                                         including personality changes and substance abuse. The hallmark of
                                                         the disease, however, is the choreiform movements that start in the face
                                                         and progress to include the entire body, making purposeful movement
                                                         impossible. The later stage of the disease is marked by parkinsonism
                                                         and dementia. After the appearance of symptoms, life expectancy is
                                                         approximately 20 years.

                What are the typical gross and          The HD brain is characterized by widespread atrophy, most markedly
                 microscopic pathology ﬁndings in        in the caudate nucleus. On electron microscopy, inclusion bodies
                 this condition?                         containing mutant huntingtin protein are seen in the nucleus and
                                                         cytoplasm of neurons.
                What are the genetics of this           Huntington’s disease is a triplet repeat disorder caused by an instability

N E U ROLOGY
                 condition?                              on chromosome 4 characterized by CAG repeats, a gain-of-function
                                                         mutation in the protein huntingtin. Wild-type huntingtin has 4–29
                                                         repeated sequences; > 36 repeats can cause the disease. As the diseased
                                                         allele is passed on to the next generation, the number of CAG repeats
                                                         increases, causing the clinical phenomenon of anticipation, in
                                                         which subsequent generations experience progressively more severe
                                                         symptoms and at earlier ages.
                What test could be used to              When HD is suspected clinically, there is a genetic test available to
                 conﬁrm the diagnosis?                   conﬁrm the diagnosis. For affected patients, genetic counseling should
                                                         be considered, particularly if they have asymptomatic offspring.
                What is the most appropriate            Treatment is for symptomatic relief only, and does not signiﬁcantly
                 treatment for this condition?           alter the natural history of the disease. Dopamine antagonists (e.g.,
                                                         haloperidol) can help control unwanted movement and psychotic
                                                         symptoms, but can also contribute to parkinsonism and dystonia.
                                                         Atypical antipsychotics have fewer side effects. Depression and
                                                         anxiety are managed with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and
                                                         benzodiazepines. The dopamine-depleting drug reserpine has been
                                                         used to control unwanted movement.

               266
 CASE 10                    A 4-month-old boy is brought to the emergency department (ED) by his parents
                             following a seizure. He was lying in his crib when his head, trunk, arms, and legs began
                             symmetrically jerking; his parents estimate that the seizure lasted 2 minutes. He began
                             seizing again in the car on the way to the ED. He has been healthy since birth and
                             has met all his developmental milestones. On physical examination, the baby appears
                             postictal. There are no obvious neurologic ﬁndings. An interictal electroencephalogram
                             (EEG) displays hypsarrhythmia.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Infantile spasms, or West syndrome. This is a rare but very serious form
                                           of generalized epilepsy in infants. It presents between 3 and 12 months
                                           of age, usually around age 5 months, and affects males more than
                                           females. Infants cease psychomotor development at the age of seizure
                                           onset, so the prognosis for these patients is very poor.

 What is the etiology of this             Many cases of infantile spasms are considered idiopathic; however, in
  condition?                               some patients, organic brain disease is found, such as the following:
                                            Phenylketonuria (PKU)
                                            Perinatal infections
                                            Hypoxic-ischemic injury
                                            Tuberous sclerosis
                                            Microcephaly or cerebral atrophy

                                           This patient likely has idiopathic West syndrome, given his previously
                                           normal development.

                                                                                                                        N E U ROLOGY
 What are the typical EEG                 Infantile spasms can be diagnosed by the characteristic interictal
  ﬁndings in this condition?               ﬁnding on EEG of hypsarrhythmia. This is a very chaotic and
                                           disorganized reading, with no recognizable pattern. It is often said that
                                           the EEG looks the same when ﬂipped upside down.
 What is the most appropriate             First-line therapy includes adrenocorticotropic hormone and
  treatment for this condition?            prednisone. Antiepileptics are used to control the seizures but
                                           commonly do not affect the patient’s long-term outcome. There is
                                           some evidence that a ketogenic diet may also reduce seizure activity.

                                                                                                                267
                CASE 11                    A 30-year-old man presents to the ophthalmology clinic with “double vision.” He states
                                            that when he gazes to the right, he sees two images side by side. This does not occur
                                            when he looks to the left. Past medical history is signiﬁcant for depression, for which
                                            he takes amitriptyline. He denies ocular pain, recent viral illness, or tick bites. He
                                            does not smoke, drink alcohol, or use intravenous drugs. Visual ﬁeld testing reveals an
                                            adduction deﬁcit in the left eye. Extreme right lateral gaze causes horizontal nystagmus
                                            in the abducting right eye and recreates the painless horizontal diplopia the patient
                                            has been experiencing. Conjugate eye movements are observed in all other directions.
                                            Accommodation and convergence are normal.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO). INO results from lesions of the
                                                          medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), a ﬁber pathway that connects
                                                          the abducens nucleus (cranial nerve VI) in the dorsal pons to the
                                                          contralateral oculomotor nucleus (cranial nerve III) in the midbrain.
                                                          Without coordination of these two nuclei, the medial rectus of
                                                          the adducting eye cannot coordinate with the lateral rectus of the
                                                          abducting eye. This leads to the characteristic disconjugate lateral gaze
                                                          of INO. In addition, the abducting eye also has end-gaze nystagmus.
                                                          INO can either be unilateral (as in this patient) or bilateral, in which
                                                          lateral gaze in either direction will produce diplopia.

                What conditions should be                INO can easily be confused with a medial rectus palsy since the affected
                 considered in the differential           eye appears to have lost its ability to adduct. However, most patients
                 diagnosis?                               with INO retain the ability to converge, as this ocular movement pattern

N E U ROLOGY
                                                          (bilateral ocular adduction in response to focusing on an object moving
                                                          closer to the eyes) does not require an intact MLF.
                                                          The presence of INO suggests a brain stem lesion involving the MLF.
                                                          INO can result from a small-vessel brain stem stroke and may be the
                                                          presenting sign of multiple sclerosis (MS). Most patients (92%) who
                                                          develop INO because of demyelination will progress to full-blown
                                                          MS. Such patients require close follow-up so that the diagnosis of MS
                                                          can be made at an earlier stage. Another important consideration is
                                                          myasthenia gravis (MG), which can also initially mimic the ﬁndings
                                                          of INO. Half of patients with MG present initially with extraocular
                                                          muscle weakness. As such, patients in whom there is any question of
                                                          the diagnosis should undergo testing for anti–acetylcholine receptor
                                                          antibodies.
                                                          Many other diseases can create such a lesion, they include brain stem
                                                          and fourth ventricular tumor; drug intoxication (e.g., phenothiazines,
                                                          tricyclic antidepressants, toluene, tacrolimus); Lyme disease; trauma;
                                                          subdural hematoma; syphilis; and viral infection.
                                                          In this patient, a history of tricyclic antidepressant use may explain his
                                                          symptoms, as this toxicity of this medication has been known to cause
                                                          INO.
                What test(s) should be used to           Imaging with MRI (with and without contrast) is the initial test of
                 determine the etiology of this           choice to help identify the etiology. If MS is suspected, cerebrospinal
                 condition?                               ﬂuid evaluation (e.g., for oligoclonal bands) is warranted. Other
                                                          recommended tests include a toxin screen, FTA-ABS/VDRL (for
                                                          syphilis), Lyme titer, fasting blood glucose, CBC with differential, and
                                                          blood pressure measurement.
                What is the most appropriate             Treatment is focused on the etiology of the brain stem lesion associated
                 treatment for this condition?            with INO.

               268
 CASE 12                     A 53-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician complaining of severe
                              nausea and “dizziness.” The patient’s symptoms began upon arising from bed. She
                              states that “it feels like the world is spinning” around her and that she feels nauseous.
                              Sitting still for a moment will cause the symptoms to abate, but upon moving the
                              symptoms begin again. The patient has no signiﬁcant past medical history and is an avid
                              runner. She denies any history of smoking or alcohol use, and any recent illness or sick
                              contacts. On examination, bringing the patient from a seated to a supine position and
                              turning her head 45 degrees to the side reproduces her symptoms and causes upbeat
                              torsional nystagmus 20 seconds after head movement. Vital signs are stable, and results
                              of laboratory tests are within normal limits.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Benign positional paroxysmal vertigo (BPPV). BPPV is the most
                                            common cause of peripheral vertigo, accounting for approximately
                                            50% of cases. There does not seem to be any age or sex predilection.
                                            BPPV is likely caused by the dislodgement of otoconia (calcium
                                            carbonate crystals) from the otolithic membrane of the utricle,
                                            which then travel into the semicircular canal ducts; this is known as
                                            canalithiasis. The debris in the canal is thought to cause inappropriate
                                            endolymph movement and, thus, the sensation of rotational movement
                                            that is out of sync with actual movement.

 What conditions should be                 Vertigo (a symptom of vestibular dysfunction characterized by an
  considered in the differential            illusion of motion or spinning) must be distinguished from other forms
  diagnosis?                                of dizziness such as presyncope or disequilibrium. Vertigo is classiﬁed

                                                                                                                          N E U ROLOGY
                                            as either central vertigo or peripheral vertigo. Central vertigo results
                                            from lesions involving the vestibular nuclei or their central pathways;
                                            peripheral vertigo results from lesions involving the semicircular canals
                                            or the vestibular nerve. Of patients with true vertigo, approximately
                                            80% have peripheral vestibular dysfunction, while the remainder have
                                            central vestibular dysfunction. The common causes of peripheral
                                            vertigo include BPPV (~50%), vestibular neuritis or labyrinthis
                                            (~25%), and Ménière’s disease (the triad of sensorineural hearing loss,
                                            ear fullness, and tinnitus). BPPV is distinguished from the latter by the
                                            transient, positional nature of the vertigo.
 What are the typical clinical             Patients complain of acute episodes of vertigo, typically lasting < 1
  ﬁndings associated with this              minute. They tend to occur sporadically and are triggered by sudden
  condition?                                head movements. Some patients experience nausea and vomiting.
                                            Nystagmus is transient (note that nystagmus due to central lesions is
                                            usually static, in that the nystagmus persists as long as the head is kept
                                            in the provoking position).
 What clinical test(s) are most            The Dix-Hallpike maneuver is the test of choice for diagnosing BPPV.
  effective in the diagnosis of this        The test is conducted by quickly taking a seated patient into a supine
  condition?                                position while turning the patient’s head 45 degrees and observing for
                                            nystagmus. While a positive test is pathognomonic, a negative test does
                                            not rule out BPPV. Nystagmus usually occurs after a few seconds and
                                            stops after about 30 seconds.
 What is the most appropriate              Repositioning exercises facilitate the migration of the deposits out of
  treatment for this condition?             the semicircular canal ducts; these include the Brandt-Daroff exercises,
                                            the Epley maneuver, and the Semont maneuver.

                                                                                                                   269
                CASE 13                     A 20-year-old college student presents to the clinic with fever and headache 2 days after
                                             returning from spring break in Mexico. The headache began the night before and has
                                             signiﬁcantly disrupted her routine. She describes it as a 10/10, nonpulsating headache,
                                             exacerbated by moving her neck. She also notes that loud noises and bright lights seem
                                             to bother her much more than usual. On physical examination, her temperature is
                                             39.1°C (102.4°F), pulse is 112/min, and the respiratory rate is 14/min. She is unable to
                                             touch her chin to her chest, and she experiences signiﬁcant pain upon ﬂexion of her
                                             thigh with extension of her leg. There is a macular purple rash over both shins, which
                                             she had not noticed before. Her funduscopic exam is normal, and she has no focal
                                             neurologic deﬁcits. A lumbar puncture (LP) reveals cloudy ﬂuid and the following
                                             results:
                                             Protein: 75 g/dL
                                             Glucose: 23 g/dL
                                             WBCs: 678/mm3, 98% neutrophils
                                             RBCs: 5/mm3
                                             Bacteria: none visualized

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Bacterial meningitis. This is a classic presentation with severe
                                                           headache, fever, nuchal rigidity, and a positive Kernig’s sign. Bacterial
                                                           infection is probable given the cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬁndings of elevated
                                                           WBC count, increased protein, and decreased glucose. The rash is
                                                           characteristic of meningitis due to Neisseria meningititis, although a
                                                           viral exanthem is also a possibility.

N E U ROLOGY
                Should this patient have                  No. She has no evidence of increased intracranial pressure (i.e.,
                 undergone CT scan prior to LP?            papilledema) and no focal deﬁcits, either of which would be
                                                           concerning for tumor or intracranial bleed and could place her at risk
                                                           of herniation during the LP.
                When should patients receive              Current guidelines state that antibiotics should be started within 30
                 steroids or antibiotics?                  minutes from the suspected diagnosis of bacterial meningitis. However,
                                                           antibiotic administration prior to lumbar puncture can decrease the
                                                           likelihood of identifying the microorganism. Generally, the LP is
                                                           performed ﬁrst, with antibiotics immediately following. The problem
                                                           arises when a patient requires CT scanning prior to LP, in which case
                                                           empiric coverage is started immediately, often with cefotaxime or
                                                           ceftriaxone. Steroids are often administered to decrease the risk of long-
                                                           term complications, either prior to or with the ﬁrst dose of antibiotics.
                                                           Steroids have proven beneﬁt in pneumococcal meningitis, but many
                                                           clinicians will give them in any case of suspected bacterial meningitis
                                                           and will continue administration for the full 4 days regardless of the
                                                           results of bacterial culture.
                What is the rate of post-                 Meningitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae is associated with an
                 meningitis complications?                 incidence of mortality as high as 19–37% and of complications (e.g.,
                                                           sensorineural hearing loss) as high as 30%. Meningococcal meningitis
                                                           has lower mortality rates (3–13%) and complication rates of 3–7%.
                                                           Negative prognostic indicators include S. pneumoniae infection, low
                                                           WBC in the CSF, altered mental status, and systemic involvement.

               270
 Is there an effective way to    Vaccines are an important tool in combating the microbes causing
  prevent bacterial meningitis?   meningitis. The Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type B vaccine has
                                  dramatically reduced the incidence of pediatric meningitis. A
                                  meningococcal vaccine targeting serotypes A, C, Y, and W135 is
                                  often offered to high-risk populations like military recruits and college
                                  freshmen. Pneumovax is a 23-valent vaccine recommended for older
                                  patients and patients with risk factors for S. pneumoniae infection,
                                  such as sickle cell disease, diabetes, or chronic obstructive pulmonary
                                  disease.

                                                                                                              N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                        271
                CASE 14                   A 31-year-old woman is referred to a neurologist for evaluation of multiple neurologic
                                           complaints. She recalls a speciﬁc episode 3 years ago of mild weakness in her right leg,
                                           which seemed to resolve over time. Last month, she developed incoordination of her
                                           left leg and left hand, although these too seem to be improving. She feels that she has
                                           also become less steady on her feet over time. Though she always considered herself to
                                           be an energetic person, over the past year or two she has been constantly fatigued. She
                                           has also been having problems focusing her attention and feels that her thinking has
                                           slowed down in general. She has noticed that many of her symptoms sometimes get
                                           worse after a hot bath or after she has been to the gym. The patient recently was sick
                                           with the ﬂu and is now suffering from a particularly bad ﬂare of her symptoms.
                                           Although her ﬂu symptoms have subsided, she is concerned by the fact that 2 days
                                           following the onset of her ﬂu she developed blurry vision in the right eye and pain in
                                           the eye associated with eye movements. On examination the patient is found to be
                                           afebrile and has normal vital signs. Her visual acuity in the right eye is 20/80 compared
                                           to 20/20 in the left eye. WBC count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive
                                           protein are all normal. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid analysis reveals slightly elevated protein,
                                           with elevated immunoglobulin G and oligoclonal bands on further analysis. MRI of the
                                           brain is shown in Figure 10-2.

N E U ROLOGY

                                           FIGURE 10-2.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Ropper AH, Brown RH. Adams and
                                           Victor’s Principles of Neurology, 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 36-1.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Multiple sclerosis (MS). MS is an idiopathic inﬂammatory
                                                          demyelinating disease of the central nervous system. This disease
                                                          more frequently affects women of northern European descent
                                                          who are of childbearing age. As seen in Figure 10-2, MS is
                                                          characterized pathologically by multifocal areas of demyelination
                                                          (often periventricular) with relative preservation of axons, loss of
                                                          oligodendrocytes, and astroglial scarring. MS has a highly variable
                                                          presentation and remains a clinical diagnosis made by the combination
                                                          of history and physical and laboratory and radiological examinations.
                                                          MS is an autoimmune disease of unclear etiology (it is thought that
                                                          stimulation of the immune system by a viral infection may trigger the
                                                          disease). Typical presenting features include optic neuritis, internuclear
                                                          ophthalmoplegia, Lhermitte’s phenomenon (electric shock–like
                                                          sensations radiating down the spine or into the limbs with ﬂexion of the
                                                          neck), nystagmus, and pain. Psychiatric symptoms are not uncommon.

               272
 What conditions should be            The differential diagnosis is limited in a young patient who presents
  included in the differential         with a history of two or more clinically distinct episodes of CNS
  diagnosis?                           dysfunction with at least partial resolution. This diagnosis becomes
                                       difﬁcult when a patient presents with atypical symptoms. In general,
                                       the differential includes inﬂammatory diseases (acute disseminated
                                       encephalomyelitis, polyarteritis nodosa, lupus), infectious diseases
                                       (HIV, neurosyphilis, Lyme disease), granulomatous disease
                                       (sarcoidosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis), other primary myelin diseases
                                       (e.g., adrenoleukodystrophy), and others such as Arnold-Chiari
                                       malformation, vitamin B12 deﬁciency, and arteriovenous malformation.
 What criteria are used to diagnose   The McDonald criteria are now the most commonly used for
  this condition?                      diagnosing MS (see Table 10-1) and are based on both clinical and
                                       MRI ﬁndings.
 What is the most appropriate         IV steroids have been shown to reduce the duration and severity of an
  treatment for this condition?        acute ﬂare, but probably do not change overall disease progression.
                                       Speciﬁc immunomodulatory agents used to treat MS include:
                                       interferon β1a (Avonex and Rebif), interferon β1b (Betaseron), glatiramer
                                       acetate (Copaxone), and mitoxantrone (Novantrone). Since the course
                                       is typically progressive, symptomatic therapy for depression, spasticity,
                                       urinary incontinence/retention is imperative.

                                                                                                                   N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                           273
               TA B L E 10 - 1 .   McDonald Criteria for Diagnosing Multiple Sclerosis

                CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS             ADDITIONAL DATA NEEDED TO DIAGNOSE MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS

                  ≥ 2 attacks plus objective            None, although MRI of the brain is recommended to exclude other etiologies.
                  evidence of ≥ 2 lesions

                  ≥ 2 attacks plus objective            Evidence of dissemination in space as shown by any one of the following:
                  evidence of 1 lesion                   MRI
                                                         ≥ 2 lesions detected on MRI that are consistent with MS plus positive CSF ﬁndings*
                                                         Observation until another clinical attack implicates a different lesion

                  1 attack plus objective clinical      Evidence of dissemination in time as shown by any one of the following:
                  evidence of ≥ 2 lesions                MRI
                                                         Second clinical attack

                  1 attack plus objective clinical      Evidence of dissemination in time as shown by any one of the following:
                  evidence of 1 lesion (clinically       MRI
                  isolated syndrome)                     Second clinical attack
                                                        AND
                                                        Evidence of dissemination in space as shown by any one of the following:
                                                         MRI
                                                         ≥ 2 lesions detected on MRI that are consistent with MS plus positive CSF ﬁndings*

N E U ROLOGY
                  Insidious neurologic progression      One year of disease progression (determined either retrospectively or prospectively)
                  suggestive of MS                      AND
                                                        Any two of the following:
                                                         Positive MRI of the brain (≥ 9 T2 lesions or ≥ 4 T2 lesions with positive visual evoked
                                                           potentials)
                                                         Positive MRI of the spinal cord (≥ 2 focal T2 lesions)
                                                         Positive CSF ﬁndings*

               *Positive cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) ﬁndings include oligoclonal bands different from those in serum, or a raised IgG index.

               274
 CASE 15                    A 30-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician complaining of double
                             vision and fatigue. Her symptoms are absent in the morning but become progressively
                             worse by the end of the day. Physical examination reveals a heart rate of 90/min and
                             a blood pressure of 115/75 mm Hg. Ophthalmologic examination is remarkable for
                             symmetric ptosis and intact pupillary responses bilaterally. Weakness of the muscles
                             of the hand is evident bilaterally, but only after multiple contractions. Sensory exam is
                             completely normal and deep tendon reﬂexes are intact.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Myasthenia gravis (MG). Hallmarks include progressive weakness
                                            and fatigability of striated muscles; proximal muscles are most often
                                            affected, and weakness in ocular muscles results in ptosis and diplopia.
                                            MG can occur at any age, but is most commonly seen in women
                                            during the third and fourth decades and in middle-aged men. It is
                                            associated with other autoimmune disorders and hyperthyroidism. The
                                            differential diagnosis includes Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome
                                            (LEMS), an autoimmune disorder that is often a paraneoplastic
                                            condition in which antibodies are produced against presynaptic
                                            voltage-gated calcium channels; this results in less calcium entry
                                            into the presynaptic terminal and thus less release of acetylcholine
                                            (ACh) into the neuromuscular junction. Associated symptoms include
                                            depressed or absent reﬂexes and increasing amplitude of responses on
                                            repetitive nerve stimulation.

 What is the pathophysiology of            MG is a disorder of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) in which

                                                                                                                          N E U ROLOGY
  this disorder?                            autoantibodies to the ACh receptor effectively blunt the depolarization
                                            of the muscle endplate. The phenomenon of “myasthenic fatigue”
                                            is due to the fact that on repeated activation of the NMJ and release
                                            of ACh, there are fewer available ACh molecules released and fewer
                                            receptors for the ACh molecules to bind. The sensory nerves are
                                            unaffected, and deep tendon and pupillary reﬂexes are preserved.
 What tests and/or imaging tools           A rapid diagnosis can be made with the edrophonium test. This fast-
  could be used to conﬁrm the               acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor will cause a transient resolution
  diagnosis?                                of symptoms in the myasthenic patient as more ACh is available in the
                                            cleft. Repetitive nerve stimulation tests will demonstrate a characteristic
                                            decrement of evoked compound muscle action potential (CMAP)
                                            amplitude. Antibody tests can conﬁrm the diagnosis and are used to
                                            follow treatment response. Eighty percent of patients with general
                                            myasthenia have ACh receptor antibodies, and 5% have antibodies to
                                            muscle-speciﬁc kinase (anti-MuSK). A CT of the chest is recommended,
                                            since 15% of MG patients also have an associated thymoma.
 What is the most appropriate              Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (pyridostigmine) are ﬁrst-line
  treatment for this condition?             treatment; these medications inhibit the enzyme that degrades ACh
                                            (acetylcholinesterase) and allow ACh to build up in the neuromuscular
                                            junction. In patients with associated thymoma, thymectomy may be
                                            curative. If symptoms persist, immunosuppressive therapy is initiated,
                                            primarily with corticosteroids and immunosuppressants.
 What is a potential complication          Myasthenic crisis is a serious complication characterized by
  of this condition and how is it           severe weakness and respiratory and pharyngeal muscle paresis
  managed?                                  leading to respiratory failure. It may occur spontaneously or after
                                            physiologic stress (infection/surgery). Management consists of early
                                            elective intubation, withdrawal of anticholinergic medication, and
                                            plasmapheresis or intravenous immunoglobulin.

                                                                                                                   275
                CASE 16                    A 9-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician’s ofﬁce because his parents have become
                                            concerned about his unusual behavior over the past 2 days. The patient’s mother
                                            states that over the past 2 days her son has had several episodes of sudden alteration
                                            in behavior. He ﬁrst complains of a rising feeling in his stomach and becomes fearful.
                                            He begins to have difﬁculty speaking, and then begins to stare and seems to lose
                                            awareness of what he is doing. He starts making strange lip-smacking movements,
                                            and assumes awkward postures with his right hand and arm. These episodes last
                                            about 30 seconds to 1 minute. As soon as an episode is over, the patient becomes
                                            tired and confused for a few minutes and does not seem to recall the event afterward.
                                            The patient is in good health, and all of his developmental milestones were normal.
                                            Obstetric history is unremarkable. He did, however, suffer from a prolonged episode
                                            of convulsions as a child in the setting of a febrile illness. On examination, the patient
                                            is well appearing. Height, weight, and head circumference are appropriate for his age.
                                            Physical examination reveals no rashes or other skin lesions. The patient is afebrile, and
                                            all vital signs are stable. Neurologic examination is normal, as is an MRI of the head.
                                            Electroencephalography (EEG) demonstrates left temporal slowing with occasional
                                            spikes and sharp waves.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Partial complex seizures. Seizures are the clinical expression of
                                                           excessive, abnormal, synchronous discharges of neurons residing
                                                           primarily in the cerebral cortex. Partial seizures are those in which
                                                           clinical presentation suggests origin in a speciﬁc brain region. In this
                                                           patient, the symptoms of an epigastric rising sensation and fearfulness,
                                                           followed by staring, oral automatisms, and dystonic posturing all

N E U ROLOGY
                                                           strongly suggest partial seizures with a temporal lobe focus. This
                                                           diagnosis is further supported by his EEG ﬁndings. Complex partial
                                                           seizures are those in which the patient has impaired awareness during
                                                           the episode. This is demonstrated by the patient’s lack of memory for
                                                           the seizure events. Simple partial seizures are those that do not impair
                                                           consciousness.

                What are the typical clinical             Partial seizures can present in a variety of ways, depending on the
                 ﬁndings associated with this              brain region in which they originate. Motor symptoms (e.g., rhythmic
                 condition?                                movements or tonic contracture of a limb or the face), sensory
                                                           symptoms (paresthesias; vertigo; and gustatory, olfactory, auditory, and
                                                           visual sensations), and autonomic symptoms (sweating, piloerection,
                                                           pupillary changes) can all occur.
                What is the etiology of this              There are many causes of seizures; careful history is required to
                 condition?                                determine the underlying cause. Some seizures are idiopathic with no
                                                           speciﬁc cause. Secondary seizures are either cryptogenic if the cause
                                                           is unknown or symptomatic if the cause is known. Causes include
                                                           metabolic (e.g., hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia), cortical
                                                           injury (e.g., head trauma, ischemia), infection (sepsis, meningitis,
                                                           encephalitis, fever from any source), bleeding (intraparenchymal or
                                                           subarachnoid hemorrhage), or chronic disturbance of neurologic
                                                           function (perinatal asphyxia, in-utero stroke, genetic syndrome, tumor).

               276
 What tests and/or imaging tools   MRI is the imaging study with the greatest sensitivity to detect focal
  could be used to conﬁrm the       brain lesions associated with the seizure focus. Single photon emission
  diagnosis?                        computed tomography (SPECT) is an emerging approach used in
                                    conjunction with EEG that can often demonstrate areas of increased
                                    perfusion during an EEG documented seizure episode. An EEG
                                    should be performed in every patient in whom there is suspicion of
                                    seizure; the EEG is abnormal about 50% of the time within 24 hours
                                    of last seizure activity. In patients with a strong suspicion of seizure and
                                    a negative EEG, a sleep-deprived EEG may demonstrate epileptiform
                                    abnormalities.
 What is the most appropriate      Anticonvulsant therapy is indicated in all patients who have more than
  treatment for this condition?     one unprovoked seizure. Criteria for withdrawal of anticonvulsant
                                    therapy include being seizure free for 2 years while on medication,
                                    having a single type of partial or general seizure, and a normal
                                    neurologic examination and EEG. Because there are many side effects
                                    of anticonvulsant therapy, patient education is of special importance,
                                    and periodic monitoring of pertinent laboratory parameters (e.g., liver
                                    function tests with Depakote) may be warranted prior to and/or during
                                    the course of treatment.

                                                                                                                   N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                            277
                CASE 17                    A 62-year-old woman is brought to the emergency department (ED) by ambulance
                                            because she is experiencing weakness and language disturbances. She and her husband
                                            were having dinner when she suddenly stopped speaking, slumped to her right side,
                                            and slid to the ﬂoor. She was unable to get off of the ﬂoor because she could not move
                                            her right side. He also noted that that she neither spoke nor seemed to understand what
                                            he was saying. Approximately 45 minutes passed from the onset of symptoms to the
                                            time the patient was evaluated in the ED. Past medical history is signiﬁcant for poorly
                                            controlled hypertension and stable angina. Her husband recalled that she had not
                                            taken her antihypertensive medication for several days. The patient smokes two packs
                                            of cigarettes per day. Family history is signiﬁcant for hypertension and coronary artery
                                            disease. The patient’s father died at age 58 of a heart attack. On physical examination,
                                            the patient is afebrile, has a blood pressure of 168/94 mm Hg, a heart rate of 70/min,
                                            and a respiratory rate of 18/min. Medications include a baby aspirin and atenolol.
                                            A mental status examination reveals the patient to be globally aphasic. She cannot
                                            produce ﬂuent speech, follow commands, repeat phrases, or name objects. Her gaze
                                            is deviated to the left. She does not blink to visual threat on the right side, and cranial
                                            nerve examination reveals a right-sided central pattern of facial weakness. Strength is
                                            0/5 in the right upper extremity and 5/5 on the left. Strength is 0/5 in the right lower
                                            extremity and 5/5 on the left. In response to noxious sensory stimulation, she does not
                                            move her right side, but readily moves her left side with good strength. Laboratory
                                            examination including complete blood count and blood chemistries are within normal
                                            limits.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Acute ischemic stroke. While some other processes such seizures, syncope,

N E U ROLOGY
                                                           migraine, and hypoglycemia can at times mimic brain ischemia, this
                                                           patient’s constellation of signs and symptoms in addition to her history
                                                           make acute ischemic stroke the overwhelming likely diagnosis. In this
                                                           patient presenting with global aphasia, a left-deviated gaze, and right-sided
                                                           motor and sensory losses, an ischemic stroke involving the left middle
                                                           cerebral artery is the most likely cause of the patient’s symptoms. Stroke
                                                           is characterized by the sudden loss of circulation to an area of the brain,
                                                           resulting in a corresponding loss of neurologic function. Strokes are
                                                           either ischemic (80%) or hemorrhagic (20%), and the same risk factors
                                                           can lead to either type. There are an estimated 750,000 new strokes every
                                                           year. Stroke is the third leading cause of death in the United States and
                                                           the leading cause of disability. Strokes can occur at any age but are much
                                                           more common in the elderly, with the death rate doubling every 10 years
                                                           between the ages of 55 and 85.

                What risk factors are associated          Key risk factors include family history, a previous stroke, hypertension,
                 with an increased incidence of            dyslipidemia, atrial ﬁbrillation, diabetes, heart disease, carotid stenosis,
                 this condition?                           cocaine use, and smoking. Age, race (blacks are at higher risk), and
                                                           gender (males are at higher risk than females) are also important.

               278
 What are the typical radiographic   In the acute setting, noncontrast CT scan of the head is typically
  ﬁndings associated with this        used to differentiate a hemorrhagic from an ischemic stroke. Typical
  condition?                          early signs of brain ischemia seen on CT include hypoattenuation
                                      of ischemic brain tissue, obscuration of the lentiform nucleus, focal
                                      parenchymal attenuation, and loss of gray-white differentiation in the
                                      basal ganglia. In particular, the earliest indication of infarction is the
                                      “insular ribbon sign” (see Figure 10-3), which is caused by edema
                                      within the left insular cortex and basal ganglia. Brain MRI can also
                                      be used very effectively to identify and differentiate acute ischemic
                                      and hemorrhagic stroke. In particular, diffusion-weighted imaging is
                                      a particularly sensitive sequence for detecting evidence of acute or
                                      subacute ischemic strokes, while the gradient echo sequence identiﬁes
                                      hemorrhagic stroke.
 What is the most appropriate        Management of acute stroke begins with stabilization of the patient
  treatment for this condition?       and minimizing risk of further damage. Maintaining adequate
                                      ventilation, ﬂuid resuscitation, and cerebral perfusion is essential for
                                      helping to minimize ischemic injury to damaged and at-risk areas
                                      of the brain. For patients who qualify, intravenous thrombolytic
                                      therapy (IV tPA) offers the best chance of restoration of blood ﬂow
                                      and recovery of ischemic brain tissue in patients with acute ischemic
                                      stroke. Eligibility criteria include clinical diagnosis of ischemic stroke,
                                      symptom onset < 3 hours, and those with a measurable neurologic
                                      deﬁcit. Interventional (i.e., intra-arterial) therapies with thrombolytics
                                      and the use of mechanical clot removal devices may be employed in
                                      certain patients who have an identiﬁed large-vessel occlusion and are

                                                                                                                    N E U ROLOGY
                                      beyond the window for IV tPA or in whom IV tPA has failed. Aspirin
                                      should be started within 24–48 hours after symptom onset (although
                                      must wait 24 hours in patients who received IV tPA). Workup usually
                                      includes ECG, echocardiogram, and carotid imaging. Stroke risk
                                      factors must be managed to decrease risk of future events.
 What are the contraindications of   IV thrombolytic therapy is contraindicated in patients with signiﬁcant
  thrombolytics?                      risk factors for bleeding such as uncontrollable systolic blood pressure
                                      > 185 or diastolic blood pressure > 110, recent history of stroke/
                                      myocardial infarction/head trauma in the past 3 months, major surgery
                                      within the past 14 days, GI/GU bleeding in the past 21 days, any history
                                      of intracranial hemorrhage and thrombocytopenia or active therapeutic
                                      anticoagulation.

                                                                                                              279
               FIGURE 10-3.          The “insular ribbon sign” in early cerebral infarction,
               which is caused by edema (darker signal) within the left insular cortex and
               basal ganglia (arrow). (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Brar-
               unwald E, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson LJ, Isselbacher KJ, eds.
               Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
               2005: Fig. 349-12).

N E U ROLOGY

               280
 CASE 18                    A 65-year-old man presents to a neurologist complaining of a resting tremor. He is
                             accompanied by his wife, who points out that her husband has been moving much
                             more slowly, has not been sleeping well, and has been depressed and anxious. During
                             the interview, the patient speaks in a low tone without facial expression, and his
                             left hand has a resting tremor involving the ﬁngers and wrist. Physical examination
                             reveals a wide-based, shufﬂing gait without arm swing. Passive movement of the
                             arms demonstrates uniform resistance to movement with a ratchet-like quality. His
                             temperature is 37°C (98.6°F), heart rate is 90/min, and blood pressure is 140/85
                             mm Hg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Parkinson’s disease (PD). PD, the most common of the bradykinetic
                                           disorders, is idiopathic and usually presents after age 50. The diagnostic
                                           tetrad includes: (1) resting tremor (usually unilateral at onset, with
                                           a “pill-rolling” quality), (2) rigidity (especially the “cogwheel” type
                                           described above), (3) bradykinesia (overall slowness with difﬁculty
                                           initiating movement), and (4) postural/gait instability. Other
                                           manifestations are micrographia, hypophonia, masked facies, memory
                                           loss, and other neuropsychiatric symptoms (particularly depression and
                                           sleep disorder).

 What is the pathophysiology of           PD affects the basal ganglia circuitry. Speciﬁcally, dopaminergic cells
  this condition?                          in the substantia nigra pars compacta (which project to the striatum)
                                           slowly degenerate and develop Lewy bodies (cytoplasmic inclusion
                                           bodies ﬁlled with α-synuclein), with a loss of pigmented cells seen

                                                                                                                        N E U ROLOGY
                                           on gross pathology. Dopaminergic input to the striatum facilitates
                                           movement.
 What conditions should be                Other causes of parkinsonism, while distinctly less common,
  included in the differential             include progressive supranuclear palsy, multisystem atrophy, and
  diagnosis?                               corticobasilar degeneration. Secondary parkinsonism can be ischemic,
                                           postencephalitic, or secondary to neuroleptics, toxins, or other
                                           medications.
 What comorbid conditions are             Common conditions include psychosis, sleep disturbances, and
  associated with this condition?          depression. The incidence of dementia in PD patients is six times
                                           higher than in the general population. Diagnosis and management of
                                           these conditions is complicated because many of these symptoms are
                                           side effects from the dopaminergic or anticholinergic medications, and
                                           because typical antipsychotic agents can exacerbate parkinsonism.
 What is the most appropriate             Treatment in PD focuses on repleting dopamine. Dopamine agonists,
  treatment for this condition?            such as pramipexole, ropinirole, and pergolide, act directly on the
                                           striatum, while levodopa is a dopamine precursor with a shorter half-
                                           life. The addition of carbidopa in the levodopa preparation prevents
                                           peripheral decarboxylation and minimizes adverse effects, such as
                                           nausea and orthostasis. Long-term use of levodopa is associated with
                                           motor ﬂuctuations and dyskinesias. Alternative agents that can be
                                           used concomitantly with dopamine include monoamine oxidase
                                           type B inhibitors (selegiline, which may be neuroprotective) and
                                           catechol O-methyltransferase inhibitors (entacapone). Anticholinergic
                                           medications (benztropine) and the antiviral amantadine are also useful
                                           in younger patients with tremor. Surgical options include deep brain
                                           stimulation or, less frequently, pallidotomy.

                                                                                                                281
                CASE 19                   A 75-year-old man presents to his neurologist with difﬁculty walking. His gait has
                                           become progressively more spastic and ataxic over the past several months, and he
                                           reports increased problems with fatigue and forgetfulness. He has lived in a residential
                                           facility for the past 5 years and complains that the food is terrible, so he has been eating
                                           very poorly. He is otherwise very healthy and takes no medications or supplements. On
                                           physical examination, his vital signs include a temperature of 36.3°C (97.4°F), pulse
                                           of 99/min, and blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg. He is alert and oriented but scores
                                           25/30 on the Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE). Neurologic examination
                                           is signiﬁcant for 4+/5 strength in the bilateral lower extremities, 5/5 in the bilateral
                                           upper extremities, a positive Romberg test, and increased muscle tone in the lower
                                           extremities. On sensory testing, there are notable deﬁcits in ﬁne discriminative touch,
                                           vibration and conscious proprioception but retained pain and temperature sensation
                                           in the lower extremities. The remainder of his examination is within normal limits. A
                                           complete blood count (CBC) reveals hemoglobin of 8.3 g/dL, hematocrit of 26%, and
                                           mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 110 ﬂ. Hypersegmented neutrophils are visible on
                                           peripheral smear.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Subacute combined degeneration secondary to vitamin B12 (cobalamin)
                                                          deﬁciency. He has a macrocytic anemia with hypersegmented
                                                          neutrophils and neurologic symptoms, suggesting the disease has
                                                          progressed to spinal cord dysfunction. B12 deﬁciency is also a treatable
                                                          cause of dementia, suggesting that his MMSE score might improve
                                                          with treatment. B12 deﬁciency often coexists with folate deﬁciency (in
                                                          addition, folic acid deﬁciency can cause falsely low serum vitamin B12

N E U ROLOGY
                                                          levels), so patients should be evaluated for both conditions.

                What is the most appropriate next        The ﬁrst step in the workup is to draw blood for folate and B12 levels
                 step in management?                      (note that a single hospital meal or blood transfusion can normalize
                                                          these values temporarily). Normal B12 level is > 400 pg/mL; levels < 100
                                                          pg/mL conﬁrm B12 deﬁciency. With an intermediate level (100–400 pg/
                                                          mL), checking homocysteine and methionine levels can conﬁrm the
                                                          diagnosis as one or both will be elevated in the setting of B12 deﬁciency.
                What is the pathophysiology of           B12 is ingested in meat and dairy products in the diet and binds to
                 this condition?                          R factor in the stomach, preventing gastric degradation. Pancreatic
                                                          proteases free the B12 from R factor in the duodenum, where it binds
                                                          intrinsic factor (IF), secreted by the gastric parietal cells. The B12-IF
                                                          compound is absorbed in the ileum after binding to speciﬁc receptors.
                                                          Disruption of any of these steps can lead to B12 deﬁciency. B12 is stored
                                                          in the body, especially in the liver, so it may take several years for
                                                          deﬁciency to become clinically signiﬁcant.
                What are the common neurologic           Subacute combined degeneration is due to dysfunction of the dorsal
                 symptoms of this condition?              columns and corticospinal tracts in the spinal cord; B12 deﬁciency leads
                                                          to defects in myelin formation, but the exact mechanism is unknown.
                                                          Patients present with a symmetrical neuropathy affecting the legs more
                                                          than the arms. Early symptoms include paresthesias and ataxia; the
                                                          disease can progress to weakness, spasticity, clonus, paraplegia, and
                                                          fecal and/or urinary incontinence.

               282
 What risk factors are associated    Strict vegetarian diet.
  with an increased incidence of      Malabsorption (pernicious anemia, gastric surgery, chronic atrophic
  this condition?                      gastritis, etc.).
                                      Alcoholism in the elderly (poor intake).
                                      Nitrous oxide exposure (inactivates cobalamin; must check
                                       cobalamin levels prior to using for anesthesia).
 What is the most appropriate       Most cases, especially those in which disease has progressed to subacute
  treatment for this condition?      combined degeneration, are treated initially with intramuscular B12,
                                     1 mg daily for one week, followed by 1 mg weekly for 4 weeks, then
                                     1 mg monthly indeﬁnitely. Some patients can be switched to oral or
                                     nasal formulations. Patients with concurrent folate deﬁciency should
                                     also receive oral folate supplements.

                                                                                                                N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                        283
                CASE 20                    A 56-year-old man is brought to the emergency department (ED) by a coworker after
                                            suffering from severe headache, nausea, and vomiting over the past 2 hours. The patient
                                            was sitting at his desk when he suddenly developed a knifelike headache that he states
                                            is “10 out of 10” in intensity. He has never had a headache like this before. Shortly after
                                            headache onset, the patient became nauseous and vomited a few times before insisting
                                            that he be brought to the ED. On presentation to the ED, the patient is increasingly
                                            drowsy and is having difﬁculty answering questions. He denies any recent illness, head
                                            trauma, or history of migraine. He smokes one pack of cigarettes per day but denies any
                                            alcohol or intravenous drug abuse. His temperature is 37°C (98.6°F), heart rate is
                                            86/min, respiratory rate is 14/min, and blood pressure is 126/60 mm Hg. The patient
                                            has no back or neck pain. WBC, blood chemistry, and coagulation laboratory values
                                            are all within normal limits. His neurologic examination is notable for a sluggishly
                                            responsive pupil on the right.

                What conditions should be                 In a patient with a history of nontraumatic acute onset severe
                 included in the differential              headache, the differential should include migraine, cluster headache,
                 diagnosis?                                subarachnoid hemorrhage, meningitis, encephalitis, temporal arteritis,
                                                           and stroke. While a primary headache such as migraine is common
                                                           and would present with similar symptoms, new-onset headache in a
                                                           patient over 50 years old is a red ﬂag that another, more serious etiology
                                                           may be the cause of headache.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). This patient’s presentation of acute-
                                                           onset severe headache (often described as the “worst headache ever”),

N E U ROLOGY
                                                           nausea, vomiting, and confusion in the absence of abnormal laboratory
                                                           ﬁndings is classic for SAH. Most SAHs are caused by a ruptured
                                                           saccular (berry) aneurysm. In this case, the patient has an aneurysm
                                                           of the right posterior communicating artery leading to compression of
                                                           the right third nerve with resultant papillary dysfunction. Other causes
                                                           include trauma, arteriovenous malformations, vasculitis, amyloid
                                                           angiopathy, intracranial arterial dissection, and illicit drug use.
                What risk factors are associated          Major risk factors for SAH include family history of SAH, cigarette
                 with an increased incidence of            smoking, alcohol abuse, hypertension, and estrogen deﬁciency.
                 this condition?                           Risk factors for saccular aneurysms include chronically elevated
                                                           blood pressure and conditions that weaken blood vessel walls (e.g.,
                                                           connective tissue disorders, infections); other notable risk factors
                                                           include coarctation of the aorta and autosomal dominant polycystic
                                                           kidney disease.
                What tests and/or imaging tools           The mainstay of diagnosis is a noncontrast CT scan of the head.
                 could be used to conﬁrm the               Noncontrast CT scan is a sensitive diagnostic tool and detects 92% of
                 diagnosis?                                bleeds in the subarachnoid space within the ﬁrst 24 hours. Patients in
                                                           whom there is a strong suspicion of SAH but a negative CT scan of the
                                                           head should have a lumbar puncture. Classically, this will demonstrate
                                                           an increased number of red blood cells in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid
                                                           (CSF). Centrifugation of the CSF will demonstrate xanthochromia
                                                           (an amber or pink hue) in the supernatant that results from the
                                                           degradation of hemoglobin.

               284
 What is the most appropriate    Patients with SAH are admitted to an intensive care unit for
  treatment for this condition?   continuous monitoring. Major complications following a subarachnoid
                                  hemorrhage include rebleeding, vasospasm, hydrocephalus, and
                                  seizures. Tight blood pressure control is important for minimizing
                                  risk of rebleeding. Nimodipine (a calcium channel blocker) is helpful
                                  for preventing complications from vasospasm in cases of SAH caused
                                  by aneurysm. An antiepileptic is given for seizure prophylaxis. Once
                                  the patient is stabilized and the source of the hemorrhage is found,
                                  deﬁnitive treatment is recommended. Treatment involves either
                                  surgical clipping or endovascular coiling, depending on the location
                                  and morphology of the aneurysm.

                                                                                                          N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                   285
                CASE 21                   A 78-year-old woman is found by her son lying at the bottom of the stairs in their house
                                           where they live together. After calling for an ambulance, the patient is brought to the
                                           emergency department for further evaluation. The son is not sure how long his mother
                                           was at the bottom of the stairs, but suspects that she must have fallen while attempting
                                           to descend the stairs. He states that she does not smoke or drink, and that she is fairly
                                           healthy except for a history of hypertension, for which she takes atenolol, and hip
                                           arthritis, for which she takes ibuprofen. The patient is unresponsive except to painful
                                           stimuli. The right pupil is 4 mm and sluggishly reactive, and the left pupil is 3 mm and
                                           reactive to 2 mm. Painful stimulation of the right lower and upper extremities elicits
                                           movement, whereas painful stimulation of the left produces no response. A Babinski
                                           reﬂex test elicits downgoing toes on the right and upgoing toes on the left. Vital signs
                                           include a temperature of 37°C (98.4°F), heart rate of 90/min, respiratory rate of
                                           16/min, and blood pressure of 135/75 mm Hg. CBC and blood chemistry values are
                                           within normal limits. The patient undergoes a noncontrast CT scan of the head, as
                                           shown in Figure 10-4.

N E U ROLOGY

                                          FIGURE 10-4.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS,
                                          Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson LJ, Isselbacher KJ, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
                                          cine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 357-3.)

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Subdural hematoma (SDH). A history of head trauma, diminished
                                                          consciousness, and focal neurologic deﬁcit, combined with CT ﬁndings
                                                          consistent with hemorrhage forming a crescent-shaped lesion, is
                                                          consistent with SDH. SDH is a collection of blood found between the
                                                          dura mater and arachnoid membrane. Frequency is directly related to
                                                          the incidence of blunt head trauma. SDH is the most common type of
                                                          intracranial mass lesion, occurring in about a third of those with severe
                                                          head injuries. Mortality is related to associated brain parenchymal
                                                          injury, which when present increases mortality from 20% to 50%.

               286
 What are the typical clinical      SDH has a variable clinical presentation based on size and location
  ﬁndings associated with this       of the lesion, speed of progression, and associated injuries to the brain
  condition?                         parenchyma. While most patients immediately become unconscious or
                                     suffer a decline in consciousness, in some cases patients do not present
                                     until clinical decompensation occurs weeks after the initial trauma.
                                     Most symptoms associated with SDH are associated with increased
                                     intracranial pressure and mass effect of the lesion causing compression
                                     of the underlying brain parenchyma. Other typical ﬁndings may
                                     include an ipsilateral dilated and/or nonreactive pupil, contralateral
                                     hemiparesis, papilledema, and cranial nerve VI palsy (either unilateral
                                     or bilateral) from mass effect impingement of the abducens nerve
                                     somewhere along its long subarachnoid course (the latter is an example
                                     of a “false-localizing sign”).
 What risk factors are associated   SDH is most common in people > 60 years old. With age-associated
  with an increased incidence of     brain atrophy, there is thought to be an increase in tension on the
  this condition?                    bridging dural veins, leading to a greater risk of tearing during
                                     head trauma, which may be negligible. Other risk factors include
                                     coagulopathies and alcoholism.
 What imaging studies could be      Both MRI and CT scan of the head are useful in diagnosing subdural
  used to conﬁrm the diagnosis?      hematoma. While MRI is superior for demonstrating the size of an
                                     acute SDH and its effect on the brain, noncontrast head CT remains
                                     the test of choice in the urgent care setting. On CT, acute SDH
                                     classically presents as a hyperdense (white) crescentic mass along the
                                     inner table of the skull, most commonly over the cerebral convexity in

                                                                                                                 N E U ROLOGY
                                     the parietal region (see Figure 10-4). A unilateral SDH does not cross
                                     the midline, but, not uncommonly, blood collection can also be seen
                                     just above the tentorium cerebelli.
 What is the most appropriate       Initial management focuses on hemodynamic stabilization
  treatment for this condition?      and management of life-threatening issues. In patients who are
                                     neurologically stable with minimal or no deﬁcits, treatment involves
                                     medical management and close monitoring. Deﬁnitive surgery
                                     (craniotomy and excavation of the underlying hematoma) may be
                                     required in less stable patients, patients who have signiﬁcant neurologic
                                     deﬁcits, or those with worsening deﬁcits; Burr hole placement at
                                     bedside in rare cases may be necessary in the setting of imminent death
                                     from herniation.

                                                                                                          287
                CASE 22                    A 27-year-old man is having breakfast with his wife when suddenly he arches his back,
                                            turns his head to the side, shrieks loudly, and falls to the ground. His arms and legs
                                            remain extended for approximately 30 seconds, after which his arms and legs begin to
                                            ﬂex and extend rhythmically for the next 2 minutes. The patient’s wife calls 911, and on
                                            arrival the paramedics ﬁnd the patient lying on the ﬂoor. He appears stuporous but can
                                            respond to vocal commands. He has bitten his tongue badly, and is soiled from having
                                            lost control of bowel and bladder functions. The patient is confused and appears to have
                                            no knowledge of what has happened to him. The paramedics transfer the patient to the
                                            ambulance and bring him to the emergency department for further evaluation.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCSs) involve both cortical
                                                          hemispheres, as opposed to a speciﬁc seizure focus in one hemisphere
                                                          (partial seizures). GTCSs may be primary generalized seizures, which
                                                          originate from both cortical hemispheres simultaneously, or partial
                                                          with secondary generalization. The latter results from interhemispheric
                                                          spread of an initially focal seizure. GTCSs typically begin with a short
                                                          tonic phase in which there is an abrupt loss of consciousness and a
                                                          stiffening of the muscles of the extremities, chest, and back. Patients
                                                          may become apneic during this period. The clonic phase is typically
                                                          longer, consisting of rhythmic muscle jerking and twitching for 1–2
                                                          minutes; it is during this phase that patients may bite their tongue.
                                                          Immediately following the seizure, there may be global relaxation of
                                                          the body; it is during this phase that patients may be incontinent due to
                                                          sphincter relaxation. The postictal state begins after the tonic stage and

N E U ROLOGY
                                                          can continue for hours, leaving patients in a stuporous postictal state,
                                                          unaware of the seizure that occurred.

                How is this condition diagnosed?         In patients without a history of epilepsy or seizure, a GTCS can
                                                          either indicate the new onset of primary epilepsy or may be the
                                                          consequence of a provoking stimulus (i.e., secondary, or symptomatic,
                                                          seizure). Potential provoking factors include metabolic derangements,
                                                          infections, inﬂammatory conditions, brain injury, drugs, or toxins. A
                                                          thorough workup must carefully rule out secondary causes of seizure.
                                                          A good past medical history, neurologic exam, imaging, and laboratory
                                                          studies are important in making the right diagnosis.
                What is the etiology of this             Primary generalized seizures occur in both cerebral hemispheres and
                 condition?                               are thought to be due to an instability of the thalamocortical circuitry.
                                                          Partial seizures that secondarily generalize begin with paroxysmal high-
                                                          voltage electrical discharges of susceptible neurons within a speciﬁc
                                                          epileptogenic focus. This results in excitation that spreads to other
                                                          cortical areas, but also to subcortical structures via corticothalamic
                                                          ﬁbers. This in turn leads to the instability of bihemispheric
                                                          thalamocortical circuitry, resulting in a generalized seizure.
                What clinical tests could be used        Electroencephalography (EEG) plays an important role in the
                 to conﬁrm the diagnosis?                 evaluation of seizures; abnormalities on EEG may be evident in the
                                                          interictal, ictal, and/or postictal phases. Prolonged monitoring in an
                                                          epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU) can increase chances of capturing
                                                          abnormalities. Despite this, interictal EEG is often normal in GTCS
                                                          patients. Both hyperventilation and sleep deprivation may increase the
                                                          likelihood of detecting abnormalities on EEG. Imaging studies such
                                                          as MRI and CT scan can identify a structural lesion or congenital
                                                          anomaly associated with GTCS.

               288
 What is the most appropriate    A provoked seizure is managed by addressing the underlying etiology.
  treatment for this condition?   In the interim, anticonvulsant medication can be used to help
                                  prevent further seizures. Recurrent seizures deﬁne epilepsy and
                                  require pharmacologic intervention. There are several antiepileptic
                                  drugs, some of which are speciﬁc for a particular class of epilepsy.
                                  Valproic acid is considered a ﬁrst-line agent for GTCS. Phenytoin
                                  and carbamazepine are good for partial seizures with secondary
                                  generalization, but may potentially worsen primary generalized
                                  seizures. Many of the relatively newer agents (e.g., lamotrigine,
                                  topiramate, zonisamide, and levetiracetam) treat secondarily
                                  generalized tonic-clonic seizures as well as primary GTCS.

                                                                                                         N E U ROLOGY

                                                                                                   289
                CASE 23                   A 68-year-old African-American man presents to his physician with his daughter, who
                                           brought him in due to concerns about his ability to walk. He lives with her and her
                                           husband, and over the past 5 months they have noticed him falling and bumping into
                                           objects with increasing frequency. The patient complains of shooting pains down both
                                           his legs. On physical examination, his vital signs are normal, but he has decreased
                                           proprioception and vibratory sense in his lower extremities. He has a wide-based gait,
                                           extreme difﬁculty with heel-toe walking, and a positive Romberg test. He has absent
                                           deep tendon reﬂexes. With his eyes closed, he cannot tell whether his toe is moving up
                                           or down, but pain and temperature sensations are intact. His pupils are not reactive to
                                           light but do accommodate. There are several plaque-like growths on the inside of his
                                           mouth which have ulcerated but are not painful.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?      This patient has tertiary syphilis. The plaque-like growths on the inside
                                                         of his mouth are gummas, manifestations of tertiary syphilis that most
                                                         commonly occur in skin, bone, and liver. Other signs can include a
                                                         murmur due to aortic regurgitation secondary to an aortic aneurysm
                                                         from years of syphilitic aortitis.

                What tests and/or imaging tools         An rapid plasma reagin (RPR) or Venereal Disease Research
                 could be used to conﬁrm the             Laboratory (VDRL) test would detect active syphilis infection whereas
                 diagnosis?                              ﬂuorescent treponemal antibody absorption test (FTA-ABS) detects any
                                                         treponemal infection, active or treated.
                What speciﬁc neuropathways have         This patient suffers from tabes dorsalis—degeneration of the dorsal
                 degenerated in this patient?            roots and dorsal columns in the spinal cord. This causes decreased

N E U ROLOGY
                                                         proprioception, resulting in a positive Romberg test, wide-based gait,
                                                         and difﬁculty with heel-toe walking. It also impairs ﬁne discriminative
                                                         touch and vibratory sensation. Involvement of the pretectum can cause
                                                         Argyll Robertson pupil, in which pupils do not react to light; however,
                                                         cortical neurons still connect to the unaffected Edinger-Westfall
                                                         nucleus, allowing for intact accommodation. Sensorineural deafness
                                                         can also result from cranial nerve VIII damage.
                What is the epidemiology of this        Since the advent of penicillin, syphilis has been a treatable disease.
                 condition?                              A nadir of incidence of primary syphilis infections occurred in 2000;
                                                         since that time, the incidence has increased, primarily in high-risk
                                                         groups, with signiﬁcant coinfection rates of HIV and other sexually
                                                         transmitted diseases. Tertiary syphilis is still uncommon.
                What is the most appropriate            For primary syphilis, treatment with 2.4 million units of benzathine
                 treatment for this condition?           penicillin G in one dose is adequate. For latent or tertiary syphilis
                                                         treatment with gumma/aortic involvement, three doses of 2.4 million
                                                         units are required over 3 weeks. Any stage of neurosyphilis requires
                                                         18–24 million units of aqueous crystalline penicillin G per day for
                                                         10–14 days. For late stage neurosyphilis, an additional three doses of
                                                         2.4 million units of benzathine penicillin G can be added over
                                                         3 weeks.

               290
Obstetrics

Case 1       292

Case 2       293

Case 3       294

Case 4       295

Case 5       296

Case 6       298

Case 7       300

Case 8       302

Case 9       303

Case 10      304

Case 11      305

Case 12      306

Case 13      307

Case 14      308

Case 15      309

Case 16      310

Case 17      312

Case 18      313

Case 19      314

Case 20      316

Case 21      317

Case 22      318

Case 23      320

Case 24      321

Case 25      322

Case 26      323

Case 27      324

Case 28      326

                   291
              CASE 1                        A 35-year-old G3P3 woman presents to the ofﬁce complaining of breast tenderness,
                                             bloating, and mild nausea. Her last menstrual period was 6 weeks ago. She is married
                                             and has three children under 5 years of age. She uses oral contraceptive pills for birth
                                             control. On physical examination, she is afebrile, with a heart rate of 90/min and blood
                                             pressure of 140/80 mm Hg. Pelvic examination reveals a normal cervix with a bluish
                                             tint. Results of a urine pregnancy test are positive. Transvaginal ultrasound reveals
                                             a 6-week-sized gestational sac with detectable fetal heartbeat. The patient is visibly
                                             distressed upon hearing about the pregnancy, which she says was unplanned. She says
                                             she is overwhelmed with taking care of her three children and does not think she can
                                             support another child, ﬁnancially or emotionally. She says she has considered working
                                             with an adoption center, but she was on bed rest for 6 weeks during her last pregnancy
                                             and is afraid of the risks and difﬁculties of carrying this pregnancy to term. She asks for
                                             information about abortion.

              What types of abortion are                   There are two types of abortion available to this patient: medical and
               available for this patient?                  surgical. Medical abortion is available for patients with unwanted
                                                            pregnancies up to 10 weeks’ gestation. Medical abortion uses a
                                                            combination of mifepristone (formerly known as RU-486) and
                                                            misoprostol. Mifepristone is a progesterone antagonist administered
                                                            orally at the provider’s ofﬁce. Two days later misoprostol, a
                                                            prostaglandin, is taken orally or vaginally, either at the provider’s ofﬁce
                                                            or at home. Most patients will pass the products of conception at home
                                                            in the next 4–24 hours.
                                                            Surgical abortion is available until 22–24 weeks’ gestation (depending

OBSTETRICS
                                                            on state law), with procedures available in the third trimester to protect
                                                            the life or health of the mother. The most common surgical abortion
                                                            procedure is dilation and suction curettage (D&C). The cervix is
                                                            dilated and the uterine contents are evacuated with electric suction.

              What is the epidemiology of                  Half of all pregnancies every year in America are unplanned, and half
               abortion?                                    of those end in abortion. If current rates continue, 35% of American
                                                            women will have had an abortion by the time they are 45 years old.
                                                            Eighty-eight percent of abortions are performed in the ﬁrst trimester,
                                                            while only 2% are done after 21 weeks’ gestation. Fifty percent of
                                                            women having an abortion report that they were using birth control at
                                                            the time of conception.
              What are the complications of                The most common complications of medical abortion are incomplete
               abortion?                                    abortion or prolonged bleeding, both of which are treated with a
                                                            suction procedure. The passage of the uterine contents is often
                                                            uncomfortable, with heavy cramping similar to that experienced
                                                            during a spontaneous miscarriage. Complications of surgical abortions
                                                            are rare, but include perforation, infection, and reactions to anesthesia.
                                                            There is no evidence linking abortion and increased breast cancer risk.
              What is the recommended                      Medical abortion requires a follow-up visit 7–14 days after
               follow-up after an abortion?                 administration of the mifepristone to ensure that the abortion was
                                                            completed. Surgical abortion follow-up is usually 2–3 weeks after the
                                                            procedure. Contraception counseling should be started on the day of
                                                            the procedure and continued at the follow-up visit.

             292
 CASE 2                        A 28-year-old woman presents to her gynecologist to discuss changing her contraceptive
                                method. She has been using condoms with her partner, but they are monogamous and
                                she would like to try something else. She has never been pregnant, but she thinks that
                                she will one day want to have a child. She has never smoked. On physical examination,
                                her heart rate is 80/min and her blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg. A pelvic examination
                                is unremarkable.

 What are the major categories of            Contraception can be divided into the following categories: permanent,
  contraceptive methods?                      hormonal, barrier, intrauterine, or behavioral. The permanent methods
                                              are vasectomy for men and tubal ligation for women. Hormonal
                                              methods either have combined estrogen and progesterone preparations
                                              or are progesterone only, and can be administered orally, intravaginally,
                                              transdermally, intramuscularly, or as part of an intrauterine device
                                              (IUD). Barrier methods include condoms, diaphragms, and the cervical
                                              cap, while there are two types of IUDs: copper and progesterone
                                              secreting. Behavioral methods include abstinence, withdrawal, and
                                              fertility awareness methods.

 What considerations should be               Each woman should decide on the appropriate method based on her
  used to decide on a contraceptive           own personal preferences and values. Only condoms prevent sexually
  method?                                     transmitted infections (STIs), and they should be used when with a
                                              new partner. Condoms and diaphragms require placement before each
                                              act of intercourse, while hormonal methods and the IUD do not. Oral
                                              contraceptives and fertility awareness methods require daily diligence,

                                                                                                                             OBSTETRICS
                                              while methods like the patch, vaginal ring, or injection have weekly,
                                              monthly, or seasonal administration, respectively.
 What are some absolute                      Absolute contraindications to combined hormonal contraception
  contraindications to contraceptive          include a history of deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolus,
  methods?                                    stroke, coronary artery disease, or hypertension. Women older than 35
                                              years of age who smoke or women with breast cancer should also not
                                              use hormonal methods. The contraindications to an IUD are recent
                                              pelvic inﬂammatory disease A culture for gonorrhea and Chlamydia
                                              can be done at the time of insertion and, if positive, treated at that time.
                                              Unexplained vaginal bleeding is a contraindication to both methods.
 How is the effectiveness of                 Two ﬁgures are quoted when describing a method’s effectiveness:
  contraception measured?                     typical and perfect-use failure rate. Perfect-use failure rate is the
                                              percentage of women who will get pregnant after the ﬁrst year, using
                                              the method perfectly all the time. Typical use failure rate is the ﬁrst-
                                              year pregnancy rate seen in epidemiologic studies and reﬂects actual
                                              patterns of effectiveness. The two rates differ most dramatically in
                                              methods that require frequent patient involvement. The typical use
                                              failure rate should be used when counseling patients about starting a
                                              new method.
 What is emergency                           Emergency contraception is best used 3 days after unprotected
  contraception?                              intercourse, but can be used up to 5 days later, and can reduce the risk
                                              of pregnancy by 89%. The only commercially available preparation
                                              consists of two pills of high-dose progesterone (levonorgestrel). It does
                                              not affect an established pregnancy and should be taken as soon as
                                              possible after unprotected intercourse for best results.

                                                                                                                     293
              CASE 3                      A 31-year-old woman develops pain and swelling in her right calf on postoperative day
                                           3 after an uncomplicated cesarean section for placenta previa. She denies any other
                                           complaints, including shortness of breath or heart palpitations. Her pain is relatively
                                           well controlled, and she has been using her incentive spirometer regularly. On physical
                                           examination, the patient is afebrile, heart rate is 88/min, and blood pressure is 125/75
                                           mm Hg. Her right calf is tender, warm to the touch, and noticeably larger than the left
                                           calf.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        Deep venous thrombosis (DVT). A Doppler ultrasound of the lower
                                                         extremities should be used to conﬁrm the diagnosis, although there is a
                                                         high clinical suspicion for this diagnosis given the tenderness, warmth,
                                                         and asymmetric enlargement of this patient’s right calf. A Doppler
                                                         ultrasound, however, is unable to detect occlusions of the iliac or
                                                         pelvic veins. Contrast venography is the gold standard for diagnosis of a
                                                         DVT, with a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of almost 100%, and thus it may
                                                         be used in patients in whom an absolute diagnosis is necessary.

              What is the most appropriate              Warfarin is the most appropriate long-term anticoagulant therapy.
               treatment for this condition?             Warfarin, however, is associated with a hypercoagulable state during
                                                         the ﬁrst few days after initiation of treatment; this is due to its
                                                         deactivation of the anticoagulants protein C and protein S prior to its
                                                         deactivation of the coagulation factors. Therefore, patients are started
                                                         on intravenous heparin and then switched to oral warfarin once the
                                                         heparin has reached therapeutic levels. Warfarin therapy for treatment

OBSTETRICS
                                                         of a postpartum DVT is for at least 6 weeks. Treatment may last for up
                                                         to 3–6 months.
              What is the mechanism of action           Warfarin blocks the actions of vitamin K within the liver, which
               of this treatment?                        reduces the production of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X. This
                                                         decrease in production impairs the activity of the intrinsic pathway of
                                                         the coagulation cascade. To reverse the effects of warfarin, vitamin K
                                                         can be administered orally or intravenously.
              Is this treatment contraindicated         Warfarin is not a contraindication to breast-feeding, as it is highly
               in breast-feeding mothers?                bound to plasma proteins and minimally secreted into breast milk.
                                                         Mothers should be encouraged to breast-feed their infants during
                                                         the entire course of their anticoagulant treatment, but infants should
                                                         nonetheless be monitored for signs and symptoms of anticoagulation,
                                                         such as easy bleeding or bruising.
              Is breast-feeding a risk factor for       No. Breast-feeding alone does not increase a woman’s risk of
               this condition?                           developing a DVT. Pregnancy, however, is a hypercoagulable state,
                                                         and all women remain at increased risk of thromboembolic events for
                                                         6 weeks postpartum.

             294
 CASE 4                    A 34-year-old G3P2 woman at 33 weeks’ gestation with a history of hypertension
                            presents to the emergency department complaining of severe pelvic pain and persistent
                            vaginal bleeding. Transvaginal ultrasound reveals a large retroplacental clot. Vital signs
                            are signiﬁcant for a blood pressure of 170/90 mm Hg, and the fetal heart rate tracing is
                            nonreassuring. The patient is diagnosed with a placental abruption and preeclampsia
                            and undergoes an emergent cesarean section. Postoperatively, the patient is unable
                            to be extubated. Physical examination is notable for petechiae on all four extremities.
                            Relevant laboratory studies are as follows:
                            WBC count: 9.0/mm3
                            Hemoglobin: 8.7 g/dL
                            Platelet count: 55/mm3
                            Fibrinogen: 100 mg/dL
                            Fibrin split products: elevated

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Consumptive coagulopathy (disseminated intravascular coagulation
                                           [DIC]). The most common obstetric cause for developing DIC is a
                                           placental abruption. Up to 10% of women with placental abruptions
                                           will manifest some signs of a consumptive coagulopathy. This diagnosis
                                           is made by history, presentation, thrombocytopenia, and schistocytes on
                                           blood smear. It is conﬁrmed with elevated ﬁbrin degradation products
                                           (FDPs) and hypoﬁbrinoginemia.

 What is the pathophysiology of           The coagulation cascade may be activated via the extrinsic pathway by
  this condition?                          thromboplastin from tissue destruction or via the intrinsic pathway by

                                                                                                                         OBSTETRICS
                                           collagen or other tissue components from endothelial damage. With
                                           placental abruption, thromboplastin may be released, which triggers
                                           the coagulation cascade and in turn triggers ﬁbrinolysis. In DIC, these
                                           two processes continue unabated. Platelets and coagulation factors are
                                           consumed, which results in severe bleeding, and ﬁbrin is deposited in
                                           small vessels, which can lead to hypoperfusion and ischemia as well as
                                           a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
 What is the most appropriate             Treatments must be directed at the underlying condition to reverse the
  treatment for this condition?            coagulopathy. If the patient is bleeding or has a high risk of bleeding,
                                           platelets and fresh frozen plasma should be given. Heparin should not
                                           be given as a treatment for consumptive coagulopathy, as it has no role
                                           in reducing morbidity or mortality.
 What changes in the coagulation          Pregnancy normally induces an increase in the concentrations of
  cascade normally occur during            ﬁbrinogen and coagulation factors VII, VIII, IX, and X. Additionally,
  pregnancy?                               plasminogen levels are increased, but plasmin activity antepartum is
                                           normally decreased when compared to its activity in the nonpregnant
                                           state, thus contributing to the hypercoagulable state of pregnancy.
 How may elevated ﬁbrinogen               In the third trimester of pregnancy, ﬁbrinogen levels are typically
  levels be protective?                    elevated to 300–600 mg/dL. With DIC, these high levels may protect
                                           against clinically signiﬁcant hypoﬁbrinogenemia (deﬁned as < 150
                                           mg/dL).
 What are ﬁbrin degradation               Fibrin degradation products are the by-products that result from the
  products?                                lysis of ﬁbrinogen, ﬁbrin monomers, or ﬁbrin polymers by plasmin.

                                                                                                                  295
              CASE 5                     A 24-year-old G0 woman comes to the emergency department (ED) complaining
                                          of left lower abdominal pain and intermittent vaginal bleeding. The patient reports
                                          being sexually active with her husband and states that she only intermittently
                                          uses contraception. She denies any medical problem but does state that she had a
                                          chlamydial infection 7 years ago. Her last menstrual period was 6 weeks ago. On
                                          physical examination, the patient is in mild discomfort, with a heart rate of 98/min
                                          and a blood pressure of 130/85 mm Hg. Pelvic examination is remarkable for cervical
                                          motion tenderness and a closed cervical os. Her β-human chorionic gonadotropin
                                          (β-hCG) level is 2000 mIU/mL, and a transvaginal ultrasound is shown in Figure 11-1.

OBSTETRICS
                                          FIGURE 11-1.       (Reproduced, with permission, from the Pathology Education Instructional
                                          Resource Digital Library [http://peir.net] at the University of Alabama, Birmingham.)

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        This patient most likely has an ectopic pregnancy in her left fallopian
                                                         tube. The positive serum β-hCG suggests that this patient is pregnant,
                                                         and her clinical symptoms of left abdominal pain and abnormal uterine
                                                         bleeding suggest an abnormal pregnancy. Figure 11-1 shows an ectopic
                                                         pregnancy in the right adnexal region.

              What conditions should be                 Ovarian torsion, appendicitis, normal pregnancy, abortion, ovarian cyst,
               included in the differential              gastroenteritis, pelvic inﬂammatory disease.
               diagnosis?

             296
 What is the appropriate workup if    An unstable patient requires an immediate surgical consult.
  this condition is suspected?         A stable patient can undergo transvaginal US (TVUS) to differentiate
                                        an intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) from an ectopic pregnancy (EP).
                                       In the case of a nondiagnostic TVUS, a quantitative β-hCG should
                                        be obtained.
                                         > 1500: above threshold for TVUS to detect IUP
                                           With a suspicious adnexal mass, the patient should be treated for
                                            EP.
                                           Without a mass, the hCG and TVUS should be repeated in 48
                                            hrs; if no IUP is detected at 48 hrs, the diagnosis is either EP or
                                            failed pregnancy.
                                         < 1500: repeat in 72 hours
                                           If hCG doubles, pregnancy is presumed, and she will require
                                            serial TVUS to differentiate IUP from EP.
                                           If hCG decreases, it is assumed that the pregnancy failed; she
                                            can be followed up with weekly hCG measurement.
                                           If hCG rises slowly, the diagnosis remains unclear, and she
                                            will need a repeat TVUS; if it remains negative, she should be
                                            treated for either EP or failed IUP.
 What is suggested by ﬂuid in the    The ultrasound ﬁnding of ﬂuid in the cul-de-sac in the context of a
  cul-de-sac on ultrasound?           positive β-hCG in a patient with abdominal pain and abnormal uterine
                                      bleeding strongly suggests the rupture of an ectopic pregnancy.

                                                                                                                  OBSTETRICS

                                                                                                          297
              CASE 6                    A 31-year-old obese G4P3 woman with a history of gestational diabetes in two
                                         of her previous pregnancies is in active labor at 41 weeks’ gestation. She had an
                                         uncomplicated pregnancy and a negative glucose tolerance test. The patient’s
                                         membranes spontaneously ruptured 2 hours ago, and she is currently experiencing
                                         regular contractions every 2–3 minutes. The patient’s vital signs are within normal
                                         limits, and her pain is adequately controlled with an epidural. The fetal heart tracing is
                                         illustrated in Figure 11-2.

OBSTETRICS

                                         FIGURE 11-2.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Cunningham FG, Leveno KL,
                                         Bloom SL, Hauth JC, Gilstrap LC III, Wenstrom KD. Williams Obstetrics, 22nd ed. New York:
                                         McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 18-15).

              What abnormality is illustrated by       These are early decelerations. Early decelerations are shallow,
               “C” on the fetal heart tracing in        symmetric decelerations in which the nadir of the deceleration is
               Figure 11-2?                             simultaneous with the peak of the uterine contraction.

              What causes this abnormality?            Early decelerations are mediated by vagal stimulation due to fetal head
                                                        compression from the contracting uterus and thus indicate a normally
                                                        functioning fetal autonomic nervous system. They are not associated
                                                        with fetal hypoxia, acidosis, or poor neonatal outcome.
              What is the most appropriate             No speciﬁc treatment is necessary, as fetal head compression is
               treatment for this condition?            not associated with adverse outcomes. Conditions in which fetal
                                                        oxygenation is compromised, such as with cord compression, require
                                                        emergent treatment.

             298
 What is the indication for an        An amnioinfusion is used to prevent or relieve umbilical cord
  amnioinfusion?                       compression during labor when altering the mother’s position
                                       (from back to side or side to back) is ineffective. Cord compression
                                       compromises fetal blood ﬂow and oxygenation. It is manifested by
                                       repetitive variable decelerations, not early decelerations, and requires
                                       urgent attention.
 What is the indication for a fetal   A fetal scalp electrode provides a direct measurement of the fetal
  scalp probe?                         heart rate tracing. It is inserted transcervically into the fetus’s scalp. It
                                       is indicated when external fetal heart rate monitoring is inadequate
                                       secondary to fetal position or maternal body habitus.

                                                                                                                        OBSTETRICS

                                                                                                                  299
              CASE 7                     A 37-year-old G4P3 obese woman at 26 weeks’ gestation presents to her obstetrician for
                                          a routine prenatal visit. She states that diabetes runs in her family. She has no signiﬁcant
                                          past medical history and denies gestational diabetes in her previous pregnancies. She
                                          was screened at 10 weeks in this pregnancy and has been receiving routine prenatal
                                          care at regular intervals. The results of a 3-hour glucose tolerance test (GTT) are as
                                          follows:
                                          Time          Glucose Level (mg/dL)
                                          0 (fasting)   90
                                          1-hour        200
                                          2-hour        170
                                          3-hour        135

              What is indicated by this patient’s       Gestational diabetes. Although this patient does not have a history
               3-hour GTT?                               of diabetes, she is at risk in this pregnancy due to her family history,
                                                         advanced maternal age, and obesity. A 3-hour GTT indicates
                                                         gestational diabetes if two of the following are abnormal:
                                                          Fasting serum glucose > 95 mg/dL
                                                          1-hour serum glucose > 180 mg/dL
                                                          2-hour serum glucose > 155 mg/dL
                                                          3-hour serum glucose > 140 mg/dL

              What risk factors are associated           Family or personal history of diabetes.
               with an increased incidence of             History of a macrosomic (> 4000 g) or congenitally deformed infant.
               this condition?                            History of polyhydramnios.

OBSTETRICS
                                                          History of prior stillbirth.
                                                          History of recurrent abortions.
                                                          Maternal age > 35 years.
                                                          Obesity.

              What causes this condition and            Gestational diabetes is caused by insulin resistance secondary to the
               when does it usually occur?               anti-insulin effect of hormones from the placenta, such as human
                                                         placental lactogen or cortisol, and from elevated circulating estrogens
                                                         and progesterone. It usually occurs later in pregnancy, as the levels
                                                         of human placental lactogen increase throughout pregnancy.
                                                         Hyperglycemia that occurs in the ﬁrst trimester is more often an
                                                         indication of preexisting diabetes mellitus, and patients should be
                                                         screened and treated accordingly.
              What is the most appropriate              Tight maternal glucose control decreases both maternal and fetal
               treatment for this condition?             morbidity and mortality. Mothers with gestational diabetes should
                                                         start with a diet recommended by the American Diabetes Association
                                                         and regular exercise. If they are unable to achieve adequate glycemic
                                                         control, mothers are most commonly placed on insulin therapy, but
                                                         oral hypoglycemic agents are beginning to be used.
              What common complications are             Common complications of gestational diabetes include macrosomia,
               associated with this condition?           polyhydramnios, preeclampsia-eclampsia, infections, prematurity,
                                                         stillbirth, shoulder dystocia, and neonatal demise. While these risks
                                                         are greater with greater ﬂuctuations of blood glucose levels, they still
                                                         exist for patients with appropriate glycemic control. Furthermore,
                                                         approximately 50% of women with gestational diabetes will develop
                                                         glucose intolerance or type 2 diabetes mellitus later in life.

             300
 What effects does pregestational   Glucose, in excess, is a teratogen for the newly developing fetus,
  diabetes have on the pregnancy?    particularly in the ﬁrst 4–8 weeks of development. Poorly controlled
                                     diabetes mellitus, as indicated by an HbA1c level > 8%, carries an
                                     increased risk of associated congenital anomalies, including neural
                                     tube defects, cardiac cushion defects, and caudal regression syndrome.
                                     Patients with known diabetes mellitus are thus counseled to have a
                                     normal hemoglobin A1c prior to conception.

                                                                                                              OBSTETRICS

                                                                                                       301
              CASE 8                    An 18-year-old G1 woman at 16 weeks’ gestation presents to her obstetrician for
                                         severe vomiting. She has difﬁculty even keeping ﬂuids down and has been vomiting
                                         at least 10 times daily. The pregnancy has otherwise been uneventful. On physical
                                         examination, her vital signs include a temperature of 37.2° C (99.0° F), heart rate of
                                         110/min, blood pressure of 100/58 mm Hg, and respiratory rate of 15/min. She appears
                                         dehydrated, with sunken eyes and tacky mucous membranes. Her uterus is measured at
                                         20 weeks’ size; no fetal heart tones can be heard. Transabdominal ultrasound reveals a
                                         “snowstorm” pattern.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?      Hydatidiform mole. This is an abnormal form of pregnancy, occurring
                                                       in approximately every 1000 pregnancies in the United States. Clinical
                                                       characteristics include painless bleeding, an enlarged uterus, very high
                                                       β-hCG levels, hyperemesis, and a “cluster of grapes” or “snowstorm”
                                                       on ultrasound. Moles can be partial or complete; a partial mole may
                                                       contain some fetal parts, but the fetus is never viable.

              What is the pathogenesis of this        Moles all contain improper combinations of parental genes. Complete
               condition?                              moles typically arise when an empty egg is fertilized by a single
                                                       sperm, which then duplicates its DNA; therefore, complete moles
                                                       contain entirely paternal DNA. Partial moles are generally triploid
                                                       and result when a normal (haploid) egg is fertilized by two sperm. The
                                                       conceptus implants in the uterus but does not develop properly. There
                                                       is trophoblastic hyperplasia, and the chorionic villi become ﬁlled with
                                                       ﬂuid, leading to the macroscopic appearance of “grapes.”

OBSTETRICS
              What is the most appropriate            Hydatidiform moles should be removed as soon as they are diagnosed,
               treatment for this condition?           due to the small but clinically signiﬁcant risk of conversion to
                                                       choriocarcinoma. The uterus is evacuated by suction and surgical
                                                       curettage. Patients are followed with weekly β-hCG levels, which
                                                       should fall to undetectable levels if the mole was completely removed.
                                                       Invasive moles are treated with methotrexate or other chemotherapy.
              What is the prognosis for patients      In more than 80% of patients, hydatidiform moles are benign and
               with this condition?                    completely removed upon uterine evacuation. These patients are
                                                       advised to wait one year prior to conceiving again, and their risk of
                                                       another molar pregnancy is ~1%. In 10–15% of patients, the mole is
                                                       invasive, necessitating chemotherapy in addition to uterine evacuation;
                                                       these patients are at increased risk for uterine hemorrhage or rupture.
                                                       In 2–3% of patients, the mole undergoes malignant conversion to
                                                       choriocarcinoma; their long-term survival remains excellent with
                                                       current chemotherapy.

             302
 CASE 9                     A 32-year-old G2P1 woman presents to her obstetrician at 12 weeks’ gestation for a
                             screening visit. Her past medical history is unremarkable, and her routine prenatal
                             laboratory studies are all within normal limits. Urine dipstick analysis is negative for
                             glucose and for protein. On physical examination, she is found to have a temperature
                             of 35.1° C (98.7° F), a heart rate of 92/min, and a blood pressure of 130/100 mm Hg.
                             Two weeks later, the patient returns to the ofﬁce and reports no complaints. Her blood
                             pressure at that time is 140/112 mm Hg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Chronic hypertension is hypertension present before conception and
                                           at < 20 weeks’ gestation or that persists for > 12 weeks postpartum.
                                           This is differentiated from pregnancy-induced hypertension, which is
                                           idiopathic hypertension without signiﬁcant proteinuria (< 300 mg/L)
                                           that begins in the second half of pregnancy, during labor, or within 48
                                           hours of delivery. Hypertension with proteinuria would be deﬁned as
                                           preeclampsia.

 What risk factors are associated         Patients with chronic hypertension tend to be > 30 years old, obese,
  with an increased incidence of           and multiparous; they often have other medical problems, such as
  this condition?                          diabetes or renal disease. The incidence is greater in African-American
                                           women and in women with a family history of hypertension.
 To what complications does this          The fetus has a 25–30% risk of prematurity and a 10–15% risk of
  condition predispose the fetus?          intrauterine growth restriction. There is also increased risk of stillbirth
                                           or intrapartum fetal distress due to placental abruption or chronic
                                           intrauterine asphyxia. These risks are proportional to the severity of the

                                                                                                                         OBSTETRICS
                                           maternal hypertension.
 To what complications does this          The primary complication of chronic hypertension in pregnancy is
  condition predispose the mother?         superimposed preeclampsia, which occurs in approximately one-third
                                           of patients; these patients tend to deteriorate faster than patients with
                                           preeclampsia alone. Additionally, there is an increased risk of placental
                                           abruption (0.4–10%) in those with chronic hypertension.
 What abnormalities are seen on           Late decelerations would be seen; these are due to a central nervous
  the fetal monitoring strip in the        system reﬂex response to fetal hypoxia. Hypoxia generally results from
  event of a placental abruption?          uteroplacental insufﬁciency, which is commonly a sign of placental
                                           abruption or hypotension. In the case of known maternal hypertension,
                                           evidence of late decelerations must prompt the consideration of
                                           placental abruption, which may require emergent cesarean section.
 What is the most appropriate             Hypertension with diastolic blood pressures > 110 mm Hg should be
  treatment for this condition?            treated during pregnancy, as treatment decreases the incidence of both
                                           maternal and fetal complications. Methyldopa, a central α-adrenergic
                                           agonist, is the only antihypertensive with proven long-term safety
                                           for mother and fetus, although β-blockers are also frequently used.
                                           Methyldopa reduces total peripheral resistance without causing
                                           physiologically signiﬁcant changes in heart rate or cardiac output.

                                                                                                                  303
              CASE 10                       A 30-year-old G0 woman with a past medical history signiﬁcant for dysmenorrhea
                                             presents to the infertility clinic with her husband for a follow-up visit. The couple has
                                             been trying to get pregnant for the past 3 years but has not had any success. A semen
                                             analysis and a hysterosalpingogram, as well as estrogen, progesterone, and follicle-
                                             stimulating hormone blood levels were all normal. A recent pelvic ultrasound revealed
                                             a 3-cm well-circumscribed mass on the patient’s left ovary. Her last menstrual period
                                             was 3 weeks ago. The couple presents now to discuss the possibility of a diagnostic
                                             laparoscopy.

              What are common causes of                     Anatomical factors:
               female infertility?                             Adhesions
                                                               Leiomyoma
                                                               Obstruction of fallopian tube
                                                               Uterine anomalies
                                                             Hormonal factors:
                                                               Pituitary dysfunction
                                                               Polycystic ovarian syndrome
                                                               Premature ovarian failure

              What is the most likely cause of             The patient’s infertility and dysmenorrhea are most likely secondary to
               this patient’s infertility?                  endometriosis. Patients with endometriosis often experience chronic
                                                            pelvic pain, typically more severe during menses, dysmenorrhea,
                                                            dyspareunia, dyschezia, abnormal menstrual bleeding, and infertility.
              How is this condition diagnosed?             The optimal method of diagnosis is direct visualization via laparoscopy.

OBSTETRICS
                                                            Surgery is therapeutic intervention, as well as being diagnostic.

              What is the pathogenesis of this             The pathogenesis of endometriosis is presumed to be retrograde
               condition?                                   menstruation, in which endometrial tissue ﬂows from the uterus
                                                            through the fallopian tubes and into the abdominal cavity during
                                                            menses. The tissue subsequently invades and proliferates in the
                                                            peritoneum, resulting in endometrial lesions or cysts. Other theories
                                                            also exist, including hematologic and lymphaogenous dissemination as
                                                            well as coelomic metaplasia.
              What treatment options are                   Current treatment options are either surgical or medical. Surgical
               available for patients with this             intervention includes laparotomy or laparoscopy, with the lysis of
               condition?                                   adhesions, excision of cysts, and laser ablation of lesions. Medical
                                                            interventions include continuous hormonal contraception, for its
                                                            elevated progesterone effect and to decrease retrograde menstrual ﬂow,
                                                            as well as gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists to put the patient
                                                            into a pseudomenopause state and decrease the estrogen stimulation to
                                                            the ectopic foci of endometrium.

             304
 CASE 11                     A 29-year-old G2P2 woman presents to the emergency department in labor and gives
                              birth at 39 weeks’ gestation to a baby girl who has difﬁculty breathing and appears
                              grossly edematous and lethargic. She had received all appropriate prenatal care until
                              23 weeks, but she has not seen a doctor since then due to loss of health insurance.
                              The infant is intubated and taken to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). She
                              is tachycardic with mufﬂed heart sounds, and she has a distended abdomen. She
                              is hypotensive and difﬁcult to arouse. Ultrasound examination reveals a pericardial
                              effusion and ascites. Despite all resuscitative efforts, the infant dies after 4 hours of life.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?          Hydrops fetalis is an accumulation of edematous ﬂuid in a least two
                                              compartments including polyhydramnios, subcutaneous tissue, pleura,
                                              pericardium or abdomen. Mortality is approximately 50%.

 What are the causes of this                 Immune-mediated fetal hydrops (IMFH): Alloimmune hemolytic
  condition?                                  disease of the newborn is caused by the destruction of fetal red blood
                                              cells by maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies. The mother
                                              must be exposed and sensitized to fetal erythrocyte major and minor
                                              antigens, so ﬁrst pregnancies are unlikely to be complicated by IMH.
                                              Rh and Kell blood group antibodies cause the most severe hydrops; less
                                              severe forms may result in only hyperbilirubinemia.
                                              Nonimmune fetal hyrops (NIFH): The pathophysiology of NIFH is
                                              thought to be the result of reduced lymphatic or venous return, increased
                                              capillary permeability, and/or reduced osmotic pressure. Structural or
                                              rhythmic cardiac abnormalities, chromosomal abnormalities (Turner’s

                                                                                                                                OBSTETRICS
                                              is most common), twin-twin transfusion syndrome, and infections
                                              such as syphilis, cytomegalovirus, and Parvo B19 may cause NIFH.
                                              Nonhemolytic hematologic causes include thalassemias, glucose-6-
                                              phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), and leukemia.
 What is the most likely cause of            The incidence of Rh incompatibility immune-mediated hydrops has
  this condition in this case, and            decreased signiﬁcantly since the development of Rh Ig prophylaxis.
  what could have been done to                All Rh-negative women should undergo an antibody screen at the
  prevent this occurrence?                    ﬁrst prenatal visit and again at 28 weeks’ gestation. Women who are
                                              Rh negative and may have an Rh-positive fetus should receive anti-D
                                              immune globulin (RhoGAM) at 28 weeks and after the delivery of an
                                              Rh-positive infant.
 Can this condition develop if the           IMFH can only develop if (1) the mother is Rh negative, (2) the
  mother is Rh positive or if the             infant is Rh positive, and (3) fetomaternal blood transfusion occurs.
  father is Rh negative?                      Fetomaternal blood transfusion generally occurs perinatally as a result
                                              of transplacental hemorrhage. If the father is also Rh negative, the
                                              infant cannot develop IMFH.
 How is fetal anemia assessed?               Doppler ultrasound of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) is the best
                                              tool for assessing fetal anemia. Oxygen delivery to the brain will be
                                              preserved if possible, so a more anemic patient will require faster blood
                                              ﬂow. This is the best and most widely used test. Fetal blood sampling,
                                              by cordocentesis, is used if anemia is suggested by MCA velocities. It
                                              can be used to obtain direct samples of fetal blood for more extensive
                                              testing, and it may be used therapeutically for transfusion if anemia is
                                              sufﬁciently severe.
 Should chorionic villus sampling            No. CVS increases the risk of fetomaternal hemorrhage and should be
  be used to determine Rh status of           avoided in cases of potential Rh incompatibility.
  a fetus potentially at risk for this
  condition?

                                                                                                                          305
              CASE 12                      A 29-year-old G1P1 woman presents to her obstetrician for her postpartum checkup
                                            4 weeks after an uncomplicated delivery of a term male. She has been breast-feeding
                                            her son without difﬁculty until several days ago, when she noticed that her left nipple
                                            became dry and irritated, and the surrounding skin started to crack. Since then, her left
                                            breast has become increasingly sensitive, but she has continued to breast-feed despite
                                            the discomfort. Vital signs are notable for a temperature of 38° C (100.4° F). Physical
                                            examination reveals an erythematous left breast that is warm and tender to light touch.
                                            No pus can be expressed from the left nipple.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?         Mastitis. Breast tenderness and inﬂammation accompanied by fever
                                                          in a breast-feeding woman is most likely mastitis. It is unlikely that
                                                          this woman has a breast abscess, as no pus can be expressed from the
                                                          nipple. Furthermore, the patient’s fever would likely be higher in the
                                                          event of a breast abscess.

              What is the most appropriate               Mastitis is a cellulitis of the periglandular breast tissue that frequently
               initial treatment for this                 occurs within the ﬁrst 3 months postpartum. Mastitis results from
               condition?                                 breast-feeding-related nipple trauma and the concurrent introduction
                                                          of Staphylococcus aureus from the infant’s nostril into the nipple
                                                          ducts. Initial treatment consists of an oral antibiotic effective
                                                          against penicillin-resistant staphylococci, such as dicloxacillin or a
                                                          cephalosporin.
              How should the treatment be                Antibiotic coverage against oral ﬂora from the suckling baby should be
               modiﬁed if the patient does not            considered in a patient not responding to antistaphylococcal therapy.

OBSTETRICS
               respond to the initial treatment?          It is also important to rule out a breast abscess in such a patient, as a
                                                          breast abscess requires incision and drainage in addition to antibiotic
                                                          therapy.
              Should a patient with this                 A patient with mastitis should continue to breast-feed her infant
               condition continue to breast-              provided that she is not prescribed an antibiotic such as a tetracycline,
               feed?                                      which is contraindicated in breast-feeding mothers. Studies have shown
                                                          that mastitis clears more quickly in breast-feeding mothers than in non-
                                                          breast-feeding mothers.

             306
 CASE 13                    A 28-year-old G3P2 woman presents to the labor and delivery triage unit at 39 weeks’
                             gestation complaining of regular uterine contractions at intervals of 5–15 minutes. The
                             patient’s pregnancy was complicated by preterm labor at 31 weeks’ gestation. Sterile
                             speculum examination at that time was negative and revealed no pooling in the vaginal
                             vault, a negative Nitrazine blue test, and a negative fern test. Her cervix was dilated to
                             2 cm and the patient was given two doses of betamethasone and 24 hours of intravenous
                             magnesium sulfate. She was discharged on bed rest and had no further complications.
                             On physical examination now, the patient is afebrile with a blood pressure of 115/70
                             mm Hg. Her cervix is dilated to 4.5 cm and 25% effaced.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        This patient is in the active phase of labor and should be admitted
                                            to the labor and delivery unit. Labor is strictly deﬁned as uterine
                                            contractions that bring about demonstrable effacement and
                                            dilation of the cervix. While this diagnosis can often be conﬁrmed
                                            only in retrospect, in practice, the diagnosis of labor is based on
                                            cervical dilation of 3–4 cm in the setting of painful, regular uterine
                                            contractions.

 What are the stages of labor?              First stage: This stage is further subdivided into a latent and an active
                                              stage.
                                             Latent: Begins with the onset of regular uterine contractions with
                                              cervical change; it lasts 4–11 hours for multiparous patients and up
                                              to 20 hours for primiparous patients.
                                             Active: Begins at > 4 cm dilation and ends at 10 cm dilation. This

                                                                                                                           OBSTETRICS
                                              stage can last 2–6 hours with a relative rate of change of 1 cm/hr for
                                              primiparas and 1.2 cm/hr for multiparas.
                                             Second stage: The second stage occurs from complete cervical
                                              dilation at 10 cm to delivery of the infant and can last from 5 minutes
                                              to 3 hours.
                                             Third stage: This stage includes the delivery of the placenta and
                                              usually lasts 1–30 minutes.
 What is the most important initial        Every patient admitted with labor must receive an ultrasound of the
  diagnostic test?                          abdomen to assess fetal presentation. A breech presentation at term
                                            would require a cesarean section without a trial of labor.
 What are common causes of                 Prolongation of the latent phase is generally due to excessive sedation
  prolongation of the ﬁrst stage of         or hypotonic uterine contractions. Prolongation of the active phase is
  labor?                                    associated with cephalopelvic disproportion.

 When does fetal descent begin?            Rapid descent of the fetus begins in the later stage of active dilatation,
                                            commencing at about 7–8 cm in primiparous women and becoming
                                            most rapid after 8 cm. The fetus generally remains in the 0 position
                                            throughout the latent phase and reaches a +1 position only at the onset
                                            of active labor. Rapid descent to +3 and +4 positions occurs only with
                                            further dilation.
 What is considered a normal               Blood loss < 500 mL is considered normal in a vaginal delivery, which
  amount of blood loss in a vaginal         usually corresponds to a 3-point drop in the hematocrit.
  delivery?

                                                                                                                     307
              CASE 14                     A 27-year-old G2P1 woman who is 20 weeks pregnant presents to her obstetrician’s
                                           ofﬁce complaining of persistent coughing and chest discomfort for the past 2 weeks.
                                           She states that her coughing is intermittent and worse after eating. She experiences
                                           chest discomfort only when lying ﬂat on her back and describes the discomfort as a
                                           sense of “fullness” with “occasional burning.” She has not been ill recently, has had no
                                           sick contacts, and denies sore throat, rhinitis, dyspnea, chest pain, chest tightness, or
                                           palpitations. She has no history of any medical problems and has had an uncomplicated
                                           pregnancy, except for some nausea and vomiting during her ﬁrst trimester. She is up to
                                           date on all of her prenatal tests. On physical examination, the patient has a heart rate of
                                           85/min, a blood pressure of 125/75 mm Hg, a respiratory rate of 10 breaths per minute,
                                           and a temperature of 37.2° C (99.0° F). Head, ears, eyes, nose, and throat (HEENT)
                                           examination reveals no facial fullness or sinus tenderness. Her oropharynx is clear. The
                                           patient’s lungs are clear to auscultation bilaterally, and her heart has a regular rate and
                                           rhythm. She has no lower-extremity edema, and her pulses are 2+ and symmetric in all
                                           four extremities.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?         This patient is experiencing symptoms of acid reﬂux. Acid reﬂux is
                                                          due to lowered gastroesophageal sphincter tone, a normal physiologic
                                                          change of pregnancy. Acid reﬂux may be further exacerbated during
                                                          the late second or third trimester due to the increase in abdominal
                                                          pressure secondary to increased abdominal girth.

              What conditions should be                  In any patient presenting with chest discomfort, cardiac causes must
               included in the differential               be considered. This patient could be experiencing atypical angina

OBSTETRICS
               diagnosis?                                 due to an unknown medical problem. Pulmonary conditions, such
                                                          as a pulmonary embolus, should be considered. The patient does not
                                                          describe symptoms relating to a respiratory tract infection, but it is
                                                          always a possibility.
              What is the most appropriate               Patients should avoid caffeine and chocolate. Antacids can be used
               treatment for this condition?              liberally; if the pain is persistent, a histamine blocker or a proton pump
                                                          inhibitor can be given.
              What are other changes in                   Up to 70% of pregnant women experience nausea and/or vomiting
               gastrointestinal physiology during           during the ﬁrst trimester as β-human chorionic gonadotropin
               pregnancy?                                   (β-hCG) levels rise. These symptoms usually resolve by 14–16
                                                            weeks.
                                                           Women will often experience symptoms of constipation as a result of
                                                            decreased large bowel motility and increased water resorption.
                                                           Women may experience biliary colic as a result of gallstone
                                                            formation precipitated by increased biliary cholesterol saturation in
                                                            pregnancy.
              What are normal hemodynamic                Pregnancy causes a physiologic increase in cardiac output by 30–50%.
               changes during pregnancy?                  An increase in systemic progesterone causes smooth muscle relaxation
                                                          in the vasculature, which decreases systemic vascular resistance and,
                                                          therefore, blood pressure. Blood pressure reaches a physiologic nadir at
                                                          approximately 24 weeks and then normalizes by 40 weeks. An elevation
                                                          in blood pressure during pregnancy may be a sign of preeclampsia and
                                                          should always be investigated.

             308
 CASE 15                    A 29-year-old G2P1 woman presents to her obstetrician’s ofﬁce at 10 weeks’ gestation for
                             her screening visit. She reports no complaints and states that she has been feeling well.
                             Her past medical history is signiﬁcant for a seizure disorder that began when she was a
                             teenager. Her seizures have been well controlled with valproic acid, and she was able
                             to discontinue her medication during her previous pregnancy without incident. Since
                             discovering she was pregnant again, she self-discontinued her medication and has had
                             no seizure activity. She is concerned about maintaining an adequate nutritional intake
                             during her current pregnancy.

 What is the most appropriate              All antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have teratogenic potential and the
  treatment for epilepsy during              regimen should be optimized prior to conception since teratogenesis
  pregnancy?                                 occurs early in the pregnancy.
                                            If the patient has been seizure free for ≥ 2 years, consider
                                             discontinuing AEDs ≥ 6 months prior to planned conception.
                                            Monotherapy at lowest effective dose is best if AED is used.
                                            Avoid valproate if possible. This pregnancy is at risk.
                                            Do not change AEDs in established pregnancy since teratogenesis
                                             has already occurred.

 What is the most important               All women of childbearing age are advised to supplement their diet
  vitamin for this patient to take?        daily with 0.4 mg of folic acid to prevent neural tube defects. High-risk
                                           patients, such as those with a history of antiepileptic medications use,
                                           are advised to supplement 4 mg of folic acid daily beginning at least
                                           1 month prior to conception since the neural tube closes at 18–26 days’

                                                                                                                         OBSTETRICS
                                           gestation.
 What is the mechanism of action          Folic acid, a biochemically inactive compound, is the precursor for
  of this vitamin?                         tetrahydrofolic acid and methyltetrahydrofolate, compounds that are
                                           essential for the maintenance of normal erythropoiesis and required
                                           cofactors for the synthesis of purine and thymidylate nucleic acids.
 What vitamin should be avoided           Vitamin A, also known as retinoic acid, is frequently used to treat severe
  during pregnancy?                        cystic acne. Vitamin A should be avoided during pregnancy because
                                           of its association with spontaneous abortion and neural tube defects.
                                           Although vitamin A is most teratogenic when taken at 5–7 weeks’
                                           gestation, it should be avoided at all gestational ages.
 When is iron supplementation             Pregnancy causes a physiologic anemia. This is the result of the
  required in pregnancy?                   physiologic increase in plasma volume, which results in an effective
                                           decrease in hemoglobin and hematocrit. All pregnant women
                                           should take a daily prenatal vitamin that contains iron in order to
                                           avoid worsening anemia. Additional iron supplementation at higher
                                           doses should be given to any woman with a superimposed cardiac or
                                           hematologic condition, such as sickle cell disease.

                                                                                                                 309
              CASE 16                    A 19-year-old G3P0111 woman at 34 weeks’ estimated gestational age presents to the
                                          emergency department complaining of 3 hours of persistent lower abdominal pain
                                          and increased vaginal discharge. She states that she cannot remember what she was
                                          doing when the pain began, but it began suddenly and since then she has noticed dark
                                          brown ﬂuid soaking her underwear. She has had no prenatal care. On examination, the
                                          patient is an anxious-appearing woman, 152 cm (5′4″) and 50.9 kg (122 lb). Vital signs
                                          are blood pressure of 167/74 mmHg, heart rate of 98/min, and temperature of 37.9º C
                                          (100.3º F). She has 4.5-mm pupils and appears pale and diaphoretic. Sterile speculum
                                          exam reveals dark blood in the vaginal vault. The remainder of her physical exam is
                                          normal.

              What is the most appropriate next        Third-trimester bleeding may be an emergency and result in
               step in management?                      hemodynamic instability, even if only a moderate amount of blood is
                                                        noted from the vagina; blood loss may be concealed by extravasation
                                                        into the myometrium (Couvelaire uterus) or behind the placenta.
                                                        Management should begin with assessment of volume status,
                                                        placement of two large-bore IVs, and administration of a bolus of
                                                        normal saline or lactated Ringer’s. Labs should be sent immediately
                                                        for complete blood count, coagulation studies, and ﬁbrinogen levels.
                                                        Transfusion of packed RBCs, platelets, and fresh frozen plasma should
                                                        follow these goals: Hct > 30; Plt > 50,000; Fibrinogen 150–200 mg/dL.
                                                        Ultrasound may be used if the patient is hemodynamically stable.
                                                        While ultrasound has a low sensitivity for diagnosing abruption, it
                                                        is very speciﬁc and may be used as a “rule in” test. Continuous fetal

OBSTETRICS
                                                        monitoring should be started immediately.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       The most likely diagnosis of painful third-trimester bleeding is
                                                        placental abruption, premature separation of a normally implanted
                                                        placenta. Risk factors for abruption are hypertension, trauma, smoking,
                                                        and cocaine use. This patient is exhibiting signs and symptoms of
                                                        cocaine abuse. Furthermore, her lack of prenatal care and obstetric
                                                        history make this more likely.
              What is the Kleihauer-Betke test?        One complication of placental abruption is fetal-to-maternal
                                                        hemorrhage. This test may be used to detect fetal erythrocytes
                                                        present in the maternal circulation by distinguishing fetal from adult
                                                        hemoglobin.
              How should this pregnancy be             The management of placental abruption is dependent on three factors:
               managed?                                 gestational age, fetal stability, and maternal stability.
                                                         All fetuses > 34 weeks’ gestation should be delivered because partial
                                                          abruption will likely extend.
                                                         Premature fetuses with partial abruption may be managed
                                                          expectantly if the mother is stable with no bleeding. Delivery is
                                                          typically vaginal but may be by cesarean section.
                                                         A fetal demise should be delivered vaginally. Disseminated
                                                          intravascular coagulation (DIC) should be ruled out.
              What is the differential diagnosis       See Table 11-1.
               of third-trimester bleeding?

             310
TA B L E 11- 1 .   Late Trimester Bleeding

 DIAGNOSIS             DEFINITION                       KEY SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS                 DIAGNOSIS/MANAGEMENT

   Placental           Premature placental               Painful bleeding                      > 34 weeks: deliver
   abruption           separation                        Coagulopathy/DIC                      < 34 weeks: expectant
                                                                                                 management

   Placenta previa     Placenta implanted over os        Painless bleeding                     No vaginal exam
                                                         Bleeding stops spontaneously          Ultrasound
                                                         Prior cesarean section, grand         Deliver if:
                                                          multiparity                             Persistent labor
                                                                                                  > 500 mL blood loss
                                                                                                  Coagulopathy
                                                                                                  Fetal lungs mature or > 36
                                                                                                    weeks

   Vasa previa         Vessels traverse lower uterine    Painless bleeding                    Emergent cesarean section
                       segment in advance of fetal       Fetal bradycardia
                       presenting part                   Vessels may rupture with artiﬁcial
                                                          rupture of membranes

   Uterine rupture     Rupture of uterine wall           Painful bleeding                     Emergent laparotomy
                                                         Loss of fetal heart tones

                                                                                                                                 OBSTETRICS
                                                         Loss of station
                                                         History of classical cesarean
                                                          section

                                                                                                                           311
              CASE 17                    A 28-year-old G1P1 woman at 39 weeks’ gestation presents to the emergency
                                          department complaining of severe, regular uterine contractions. On cervical
                                          examination, she is 5 cm dilated and is promptly admitted to the labor and delivery unit.
                                          The patient reports no complications with her pregnancy and has no medical problems.
                                          After almost 22 hours of active laboring, the patient delivers a 3.6-kg (8-lb) healthy baby
                                          girl. The placenta is delivered without difﬁculty, but the patient continues to bleed.
                                          Vaginal examination reveals the patient has extensive perineal lacerations.

              How is this condition classiﬁed?          First-degree perineal laceration due to birth trauma is a common
                                                         obstetric complication caused by stretching of the birth canal. It is
                                                         limited to the vaginal mucosa, skin, and superﬁcial subcutaneous
                                                         and submucosal tissues. Second-degree lacerations penetrate into the
                                                         superﬁcial fascia and transverse perineal musculature. Third-degree
                                                         lacerations extend into the anal sphincter. Fourth-degree lacerations
                                                         extend beyond the anal sphincter and into the rectal mucosa.

              What risk factors are associated          Risk factors associated with lower genital tract trauma in the obstetric
               with an increased incidence of            setting include nulliparity, a large infant, precipitous birth, operative
               this condition?                           vaginal delivery with vacuum or forceps, and episiotomy.
              What is the most appropriate              First-degree lacerations of the perineum or vagina not involving
               treatment for this condition?             underlying tissues rarely require repair, as they tend to heal quickly
                                                         and neatly. Sutures are needed only for control of active bleeding.
                                                         Second-, third-, and fourth-degree lacerations, however, always require
                                                         surgical repair. In these lacerations the tissues may be distorted, making

OBSTETRICS
                                                         identiﬁcation of the fascial planes more difﬁcult. In the event of a
                                                         fourth-degree laceration, the torn rectal mucosa must be repaired
                                                         separately from the rest of the tissue with the desire to avoid the
                                                         formation of a rectovaginal ﬁstula.

             312
 CASE 18                      A 36-year-old G5P4 woman at 27 weeks’ gestation presents to her obstetrician
                               complaining of vaginal bleeding. She states that the bleeding began 2 days ago as mild,
                               pinkish spotting but has recently worsened. She denies any abdominal or pelvic pain
                               with the bleeding and states that she has not experienced any recent trauma. She has no
                               medical problems except for a history of preeclampsia in a previous pregnancy, which
                               necessitated an emergent cesarean section. Vital signs are notable for a temperature
                               of 37.3° C (99.2° F), a heart rate of 90/min, and a blood pressure of 105/70 mm Hg.
                               Physical examination is notable for a gravid uterus with sizes equal to dates, and a
                               cervical exam was not performed.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?         Placenta previa. A placenta previa is a placenta that is located directly
                                             over or very near the internal cervical os. In a complete placenta previa,
                                             the internal os is completely covered, while in a partial placenta previa,
                                             the internal os is only slightly covered, and in a marginal placenta
                                             previa, the edge of the placenta abuts the internal os. A low-lying
                                             placenta is implanted in the lower uterine segment but does not touch
                                             the internal os. It is unlikely that this patient’s bleeding is the result
                                             of a placental abruption, as this patient denies recent trauma or pain
                                             associated with the bleeding (see below). Given that the patient is in
                                             her second trimester of pregnancy, her bleeding cannot be the result of
                                             a missed abortion.

 What risk factors are associated           Common risk factors for a placenta previa are advanced maternal age,
  with an increased incidence of             multiparity, multifetal gestation, a prior cesarean delivery, and smoking.

                                                                                                                          OBSTETRICS
  this condition?
 How is this condition diagnosed?           Diagnosis of a placenta previa is by clinical history and sonography. A
                                             placenta previa should always be suspected in a woman with uterine
                                             bleeding during the latter half of her pregnancy. A sonogram will
                                             demonstrate the position of the placenta and whether it is free of the
                                             internal os. It is important to note that a pelvic examination in which a
                                             ﬁnger is passed through the cervix in an attempt to palpate the placenta
                                             should not be performed, as direct manipulation of the placenta can
                                             induce severe hemorrhage.
 Is the use of transvaginal                 No. Although it may appear to be dangerous to introduce an ultrasound
  ultrasonography contraindicated            probe into the vagina of a woman with a placenta previa, this technique
  in this condition?                         has routinely been shown to be safe. Given the substantially improved
                                             quality of sonograms with the transvaginal approach, this technique is
                                             often preferred to a transabdominal ultrasound.
 What is the other most common              Placental abruption. A placental abruption is the premature separation
  cause of antepartum hemorrhage?            of the normally implanted placenta. In contrast to the painless
                                             bleeding associated with a placenta previa, a placental abruption is
                                             usually painful.
 What is placental “migration”?             Placental “migration” describes the phenomenon in which a partial or
                                             marginal placenta previa early in pregnancy “migrates” upward as the
                                             uterus expands so that the placenta is completely free of the internal os
                                             by term.

                                                                                                                  313
              CASE 19                    A 27-year-old G2P1 woman is 2 days postpartum after a cesarean delivery of a 2.8-
                                          kg (6 lb 4 oz) boy. The patient’s pregnancy was complicated by preterm premature
                                          rupture of membranes (PPROM) at 32 weeks, for which she was hospitalized. Fetal
                                          heart tracings were reassuring throughout the patient’s hospitalization, and she began
                                          labor spontaneously at 34 weeks and 4 days. A cesarean section was performed due to
                                          nonreassuring heart tracings after 10 hours of labor. The patient complains of worsening
                                          abdominal pain and general malaise. On physical examination, she has a temperature
                                          of 38.9° C (102.1° F), a heart rate of 120/min, uterine tenderness, and foul-smelling
                                          lochia.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Endometritis is an infection of the endometrial tissue that usually
                                                        occurs on the second or third postpartum day. It is most common
                                                        in patients with prolonged rupture of membranes, prolonged labor,
                                                        operative vaginal deliveries, cesarean section, poor nutrition, and
                                                        obesity.

              Which conditions must be ruled           The classic causes of postoperative fever must be considered in any
               out?                                     febrile patient who is status post cesarean section. These include the
                                                        “5 W’s”:
                                                         Wind (postoperative days 1–2): Atelectasis without pneumonia,
                                                          predominantly in the dependent lower lung segments. This often
                                                          occurs as a result of inadequate ventilation due to ventilator support
                                                          or incisional pain on deep breathing.
                                                         Water (postoperative days 3–5): Urinary tract infection. This is

OBSTETRICS
                                                          frequently caused by ascending infection from urinary catheters used
                                                          during and/or after surgery.
                                                         Walking (postoperative days 4–6): Deep venous thrombosis. This
                                                          is most common in patients recovering from pelvic, orthopedic,
                                                          or general surgeries and is best prevented by early and frequent
                                                          ambulation.
                                                         Wounds (postoperative days 5–7): Wound infections or abscess
                                                          formation. This can be caused by aerobic or anaerobic bacteria,
                                                          depending on the site of infection.
                                                         Wonder drugs (postoperative days 7+): Medications prescribed
                                                          postoperatively may induce a febrile reaction.
                                                        Obstetrics then adds two additional W’s with:
                                                         Womb (postoperative days 2–7): This represents endometritis and is a
                                                          common cause of postpartum fever.
                                                         Weaning (4–5 days postpartum to 3–4 months): This primarily
                                                          represents mastitis, but a patient can also have a low-grade fever
                                                          when her milk supply develops. Engorgement happens usually
                                                          postpartum day 3.
              What laboratory test should              Blood cultures should be obtained in any postpartum febrile patient,
               be obtained prior to initiating          as bacteremia (which may result in sepsis) occurs in 10–20% of such
               treatment?                               patients. Due to the polymicrobial nature of endometritis, both
                                                        anaerobic and aerobic cultures must be drawn prior to beginning
                                                        antibiotic therapy, as antibiotics will decrease the organism load in the
                                                        blood and may cause a false-negative result.

             314
 What other laboratory test would   A complete blood count (CBC) with a differential is helpful in
  be helpful?                        following the patient’s response to treatment. A leukocytosis with an
                                     elevated neutrophil count and bandemia are highly suggestive of an
                                     infectious process. These parameters, along with clinical signs and
                                     symptoms, can be followed to track the patient’s response to antibiotics.
                                     Note that a CBC is not needed before starting antibiotics.
 What laboratory test would be of   Endometrial cultures would be of little clinical and diagnostic utility.
  little help?                       Endometritis is commonly caused by local ﬂora of the genital tract; and
                                     therefore, it is difﬁcult to isolate an uncontaminated specimen through
                                     the cervix.
 What is the most appropriate       Antibiotic therapy is guided by epidemiologic considerations rather
  treatment for this condition?      than laboratory ﬁndings. Endometritis is typically a polymicrobial
                                     infection due to anaerobic streptococci, gram-negative coliforms,
                                     Bacteroides species, and aerobic streptococci. Antibiotic coverage with
                                     a cephalosporin and clindamycin is thus usually adequate, although
                                     hospital-speciﬁc infection patterns should be used to tailor therapy.

                                                                                                                 OBSTETRICS

                                                                                                          315
              CASE 20                      A 30-year-old woman with type 1 diabetes mellitus delivers a 4.3 kg (9 lb 8 oz) baby
                                            boy at 39 weeks’ gestation. The ﬁrst stage of labor progressed without incident, but
                                            the second stage was markedly prolonged. The patient received epidural anesthesia,
                                            which controlled her pain well. Immediately after the delivery of an intact placenta,
                                            the patient continues to bleed vaginally. Vital signs are signiﬁcant for a blood pressure
                                            of 120/70 mm Hg and a heart rate of 79/min. The patient is alert and conversant.
                                            Bimanual examination reveals a soft, enlarged, boggy uterus.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?          Postpartum hemorrhage secondary to uterine atony. The patient has
                                                           several risk factors for uterine atony (see below). Her uterus is soft
                                                           and “boggy,” a classic sign for uterine atony. She delivered an intact
                                                           placenta, making retained products of conception an unlikely cause
                                                           of her hemorrhage. It is possible that, in addition to an atonic uterus,
                                                           this patient could have sustained perineal lacerations secondary to the
                                                           size of her newborn, but the primary cause of the hemorrhage here is
                                                           uterine atony.

              What risk factors are associated            Uterine atony is the most common cause of postpartum hemorrhage.
               with an increased incidence of              Risk factors include uterine overdistention secondary to multiple
               this condition?                             gestations, macrosomia (which commonly occurs in pregnancies of
                                                           diabetic mothers), polyhydramnios, an exhausted myometrium due to
                                                           rapid or prolonged labor or oxytocin stimulation, uterine infection, or
                                                           conditions that interfere with contractions, such as anesthesia, myomas,
                                                           or magnesium sulfate.

OBSTETRICS
              What is the most appropriate                The ﬁrst step in treating uterine atony is bimanual uterine massage.
               initial treatment for this                  This technique is usually successful in controlling bleeding without
               condition?                                  the need for medication or surgical interventions. Uterine massage
                                                           should be performed bimanually, with one hand placed over the uterus
                                                           externally and one hand placed in the vagina.
              What agent can be administered              Oxytocin is routinely given after delivery to stimulate uterine
               as a second-line therapy to help            contraction and facilitate placental delivery. An additional oxytocin
               reduce the bleeding?                        infusion can be administered to help control postpartum hemorrhage
                                                           secondary to uterine atony. Oxytocin stimulates uterine contraction,
                                                           which generally stops hemorrhage.
              What are contraindications to this          There are no absolute contraindications to an oxytocin infusion.
               medication and why?                         However, it should never be given as an undiluted bolus due to the
                                                           risk of serious hypotension or cardiac arrhythmias; it should always
                                                           be diluted in lactated Ringer’s solution or normal saline. If oxytocin
                                                           is ineffective, an intramuscular dose of methylergonovine, an
                                                           ergot derivative, can be administered. This drug may cause serious
                                                           hypertension and therefore should not be administered to women with
                                                           preeclampsia or eclampsia. Prostaglandin F2-α (PGF-2α) can also
                                                           be used but is contraindicated in women with a signiﬁcant history of
                                                           asthma. Another prostaglandin, misoprostol, can be used rectally but
                                                           has a slower onset of action.
              What invasive options are                   Uterine or internal iliac artery ligation or hysterectomy should be
               available if conventional medical           performed if hemorrhage persists after conventional therapies.
               therapies fail?

             316
 CASE 21                       A 22-year-old G2P0 woman presents to her obstetrician’s ofﬁce at 36 weeks’ gestation
                                complaining of a mild headache. She has a history of a missed abortion at 12 weeks’
                                gestation 2 years ago, which required a dilation and curettage. Her pregnancy has been
                                uncomplicated until last week, when she presented with a headache and blood pressure
                                of 142/78 mm Hg. No proteinuria was noted at that time. Currently, the patient denies
                                any complaints other than a mild headache and reports no uterine contractions or
                                vaginal bleeding. On physical examination, her temperature is 36.6° C (97.9° F), her
                                heart rate is 92/min, and her blood pressure is 148/88 mm Hg. Her urine dipstick result
                                is 1+ protein, and 24-hour urine monitoring is initiated.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?          Preeclampsia is deﬁned as elevated blood pressure and proteinuria
                                              after 20 weeks’ gestation and until 6 weeks postpartum. Eclampsia
                                              occurs in the above setting with the addition of seizures. Classically,
                                              three elements were required for the diagnosis of preeclampsia-
                                              eclampsia: hypertension, proteinuria, and edema. Edema was difﬁcult
                                              to objectively quantify and is no longer required.

 What is the epidemiology of this            Preeclampsia-eclampsia develops in approximately 7% of pregnant
  condition?                                  women in the United States. Of women developing preeclampsia, 5%
                                              progress to eclampsia. Primiparous women are most frequently affected.
                                              Risk factors include multiple pregnancies, chronic hypertension,
                                              diabetes, renal disease, autoimmune disorders, and gestational
                                              trophoblastic disease.
 What are the stages of this                 Mild preeclampsia is diagnosed by a blood pressure > 140 mm Hg

                                                                                                                          OBSTETRICS
  condition?                                  systolic or 90 mm Hg diastolic and proteinuria > 300 mg/24 hr. Severe
                                              preeclampsia is deﬁned as blood pressures > 160 mm Hg systolic or
                                              110 mm Hg diastolic and proteinuria > 5 g/24 hr or oliguria (< 500 mL
                                              urine/24 hr).
 What are clinical signs of this             Signs of severe preeclampsia are persistent headache or other cerebral
  condition?                                  or visual disturbances, including blurred vision or scotomata, persistent
                                              right upper quadrant or epigastric pain, hyperreactive reﬂexes with
                                              clonus, and intrauterine growth restriction in the fetus.
 What laboratory parameters                  Any patient with signs or symptoms of severe preeclampsia should be
  must be monitored routinely in              evaluated for HELLP syndrome, deﬁned as Hemolysis, Elevated LFTs,
  patients with this condition?               and Low Platelets. Patients should be routinely monitored with the
                                              following laboratory parameters: complete blood count, electrolytes,
                                              BUN/creatinine, uric acid, liver function tests, and prothrombin time/
                                              partial thromboplastin time. If disseminated intravascular coagulation
                                              (DIC) is considered, ﬁbrinogen and ﬁbrin split products should also be
                                              evaluated.
 What is the most appropriate                The only deﬁnitive treatment for preeclampsia-eclampsia is delivery
  treatment for this condition?               of the fetus and placenta. A woman with preeclampsia at term is
                                              delivered. Mild preeclampsia in a preterm woman may be managed
                                              expectantly, depending on the risks and beneﬁts for the fetus and the
                                              mother. Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia generally necessitate
                                              delivery regardless of gestational age of the fetus. When indicated,
                                              blood pressure should be controlled with β-blockers and/or hydralazine
                                              and seizure prophylaxis given with continuous magnesium sulfate.
                                              (Patients on magnesium sulfate must be monitored for signs of
                                              magnesium toxicity—loss of deep tendon reﬂexes, respiratory paralysis,
                                              and coma, which can be reversed with intravenous calcium gluconate.)

                                                                                                                   317
              CASE 22                    A 28-year-old G1 at 42 weeks’ gestation is admitted to labor and delivery to undergo
                                          scheduled induction. Her prenatal care has been routine, regular, and uncomplicated.
                                          Her last obstetric ultrasound was at 36 weeks’ gestation, which revealed a healthy
                                          male fetus. After several hours of labor, contractions are 4 minutes apart. Electronic
                                          fetal monitoring demonstrates repetitive late decelerations and minimal beat-to-beat
                                          variability, and an emergency cesarean section is performed. When membranes are
                                          ruptured, amniotic ﬂuid appears brownish-green and has no odor. The infant has long,
                                          thin limbs with decreased fat on his body. He has peeling, brown-stained skin, long
                                          ﬁngernails, and decreased vernix. His lips appear bluish, and he has subxiphoid and
                                          abdominal retractions with inspiration. Auscultation reveals rales bilaterally. Apgars are
                                          4 and 3 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Relevant ﬁndings on arterial blood gas are pH
                                          7.25, PCO2 45, HCO3 20, and PO2 62.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        Meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS) classically occurs in postterm
                                                         infants with signs and symptoms of fetal dysmaturity, including weight
                                                         loss, long nails, and signs of intra-amniotic meconium such as stained
                                                         skin, nails, and umbilical cord.

              What is the pathophysiology of            Aspiration of meconium has three primary effects: (1) mechanical
               this condition?                           obstruction results in air trapping and uneven ventilation; (2)
                                                         chemical inﬂammation; and (3) surfactant inactivation that result in
                                                         atelectasis and intrapulmonary shunting. The ﬁnal common pathway is
                                                         hypoxemic acidosis and primary pulmonary hypertension.
              Is meconium staining of amniotic          No. Thin meconium staining with an asymptomatic infant generally

OBSTETRICS
               ﬂuid an indication for deep               has a favorable outcome and should not be managed aggressively.
               suctioning or intubation?                 If there is a need for intubation, immediate postpartum direct
                                                         laryngoscopy with removal of residual meconium by deep suction is
                                                         imperative.
              What infants should receive deep          If meconium is thick, there is antenatal fetal distress, or oropharyngeal
               endotracheal suctioning?                  suctioning has been omitted.

              What other risks exist for post-          Stillbirth and early neonatal deaths are twice as common at or
               term infants?                             greater than 42 weeks’ gestation compared to term infants. Asphyxia,
                                                         intrauterine infection, and macrosomia are all more common in
                                                         postterm infants.

             318
 What is the proper management      Postterm infants may exhibit macrosomia (> 4500 g), which places
 if the baby’s head has exited the   them at risk for shoulder dystocia. Obstetric maneuvers should be used
 vagina but the remainder of the     in combination by subsequently adding each maneuver in the order
 body cannot pass?                   listed below:
                                      McRoberts: ﬂexion of the hip, bringing the mother’s knees toward
                                        her shoulders.
                                      Suprapubic pressure: resolves > 50% of cases.
                                      Rubin II: place hand behind baby’s anterior shoulder and rotate
                                        anteriorly.
                                      Woods screw: press on the clavicle of the posterior shoulder such that
                                        it rotates posteriorly.
                                      Reverse Woods screw: change direction of rotation to anterior
                                        shoulder in posterior direction.
                                      Removal of posterior arm: the physician places his entire hand into
                                        the birth canal. The fetal elbow is ﬂexed, and the arm is delivered.
                                      Gaskin all-fours maneuver: the patient rolls onto all fours into the
                                        knee-chest position.
                                      Last resort moves:
                                         Intentional clavicle fracture.
                                         Emergent cesarean section following a return of the fetus into the
                                           vagina.

                                                                                                                OBSTETRICS

                                                                                                        319
              CASE 23                    A 31-year-old G3P2 woman presents to her obstetrician at 16 weeks’ gestation. Both
                                          of her previous pregnancies were uncomplicated and resulted in normal spontaneous
                                          vaginal deliveries. The patient has no known medical problems and complains only
                                          of occasional morning sickness with nausea and vomiting. As part of her routine
                                          prenatal laboratory tests, the patient agrees to a triple screen test, which reveals a
                                          decreased maternal serum α-fetoprotein (MSAFP) level, elevated β-human chorionic
                                          gonadotropin (β-hCG), and a normal estradiol level.

              What is α-fetoprotein (AFP)?              AFP is a protein produced by the fetus and found in the amniotic ﬂuid.
                                                         Small amounts of this protein cross the placenta and enter into the
                                                         maternal circulation, providing the basis for the maternal serum AFP
                                                         (MSAFP) blood test. This test is offered to all pregnant women.

              What are possible causes of an             Elevated MSAFP.
               abnormal MSAFP?                            Open neural tube defects (anencephaly, spina biﬁda).
                                                          Abdominal wall defects (gastroschisis, omphalocele).
                                                          Multiple gestation, incorrect gestational dating, fetal death, and
                                                           placental abnormalities.
                                                          Low MSAFP: trisomy 18 or trisomy 21, incorrect dating.

              What is the triple screen test?           The triple screen test is more sensitive than the MSAFP alone and
                                                         includes measurements of MSAFP, β-hCG, and estriol levels in
                                                         the maternal serum. In trisomy 18, levels of all three compounds
                                                         are typically decreased. In trisomy 21, levels of AFP and estriol are
                                                         typically decreased while β-hCG is elevated.

OBSTETRICS
              What are the indications for an           Amniocentesis is offered to women:
               amniocentesis?                             Who will be > 35 years old at the time of delivery.
                                                          With an abnormal triple screen test in order to test for trisomy 18 or
                                                           trisomy 21.
                                                          With an Rh-sensitized pregnancy in order to obtain fetal blood type
                                                           or to detect fetal hemolysis.
                                                          Who may deliver prematurely to evaluate for fetal lung maturity.

              What are the risks associated with        Risks associated with an amniocentesis are fetal-maternal hemorrhage
               amniocentesis?                            (1–2%) and fetal death (0.5%). This is in contrast to a 1% risk of fetal
                                                         loss with chorionic villus sampling and an almost risk-free MSAFP or
                                                         triple screen test.
              At what gestational age are the           Amniocentesis is performed at 15–17 weeks gestation, and MSAFP
               above tests performed?                    and the triple screen test are performed at 15–20 weeks gestation.
                                                         Chorionic villus sampling may be performed at 10–12 weeks to assess
                                                         fetal karyotype.

             320
 CASE 24                    A 28-year-old G1 woman at 30 weeks’ estimated gestation presents to her obstetrician
                             complaining of painful contractions occurring every 8 minutes for the past 2 hours.
                             She has received appropriate prenatal care with no complications to date. She
                             denies changes in vaginal discharge or leakage of ﬂuid. She reports feeling tired with
                             signiﬁcant back pain, but when asked to clarify, she states that she has felt this way for
                             the last few months. On review of symptoms, she denies headache, vision changes,
                             shortness of breath, or burning with urination. She has costovertebral tenderness
                             bilaterally, and the remainder of the exam including vitals is normal. Relevant
                             laboratory values include WBC 8000/mm3; urinalysis is normal.

 What is the next step in                   Assess the uterus for ﬁrmness, tenderness, fetal size and fetal position.
  diagnosis?                                  Uterine tenderness with preterm contractions should raise concern
                                              for chorioamnionitis.
                                             A sterile speculum exam should be performed to rule out rupture of
                                              membranes and uterine bleeding and collect a vaginal swab from the
                                              posterior fornix for fetal ﬁbronectin.
                                             A digital exam allows assessment of effacement and dilation.
                                             Transvaginal ultrasound may evaluate cervical changes.
                                             Secondary causes of preterm labor, such as urinary tract infection,
                                              should be sought. Group B strep (GBS) status of the mother should
                                              be assessed.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Preterm labor (PTL) is deﬁned as uterine contractions < 10 minutes
                                            apart and a cervix dilated at least 2 cm and changing or at least 80%

                                                                                                                           OBSTETRICS
                                            effaced between 20 and 37 weeks’ gestational age.
 What are the most appropriate             The next step in management is to conﬁrm the diagnosis of PTL. If the
  next steps in the management of           fetal ﬁbronectin is negative, there is a > 95% chance that the patient
  this condition?                           will not deliver in the next 2 weeks. If the test is positive then the
                                            chance of delivery in the next 2 weeks is 50%.
                                             Rule out contraindications to tocolysis (i.e., preeclampsia, rupture of
                                               membranes, lethal fetal anomaly).
                                             Hydrate: Insufﬁcient hydration is a common cause of PTL.
                                             Tocolysis with nifedipine, indomethacin, terbutaline, or magnesium
                                               sulfate.
                                             Steroids: If the fetus is ≤ 34 weeks’ gestation, two doses of IM
                                               betamethasone should be given 24 hours apart to stimulate fetal
                                               surfactant production and reduce risk if intracranial hemorrhage. It
                                               requires 48 hours for maximal response.
                                             GBS prophylaxis with IV penicillin G.

 What risk factors are associated           History of PTL.
  with an increased incidence of             Uterine anomaly or distension (multiple gestation, polyhydramnios).
  this condition?                            Premature rupture of membranes.
                                             Substances: smoking, cocaine.
                                             History of cervical cone biopsy.
                                             African-American race.
                                             Pyelonephritis.
                                             Stress: single women, depression, anxiety, low socioeconomic status.

                                                                                                                     321
              CASE 25                    A 23-year-old G2P1 woman at 28 weeks’ gestation presents to the emergency
                                          department complaining of clear ﬂuid on her underwear that has collected for the
                                          past 4 hours. She has had all appropriate prenatal care and is in good health other
                                          than continuing to smoke a half-pack of cigarettes daily. She denies fever and all
                                          constitutional symptoms of infection and states that when she woke this morning
                                          she could feel the baby moving. Her past medical history is unremarkable. Social
                                          history is signiﬁcant in that she is currently unemployed and recently began dating
                                          a man who has moved in with her. On physical examination, her lungs are clear to
                                          auscultation, and she has no costovertebral tenderness. She has mild discomfort with
                                          lower abdominal palpation. Vital signs are 37.1° C (98.8° F), pulse 99/min, and blood
                                          pressure 145/88 mm Hg. Fetal heart tones have normal range and variability.

              What is the next step in diagnosis?      A sterile speculum exam must be performed to conﬁrm the occurrence
                                                        of preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM). Positive
                                                        ﬁndings will include pooling, the collection of amniotic ﬂuid in
                                                        posterior vaginal vault, a positive nitrazine test, indicating alkaline
                                                        changes of amniotic ﬂuid, and ferning, a snowﬂake pattern seen when
                                                        the collected ﬂuid is analyzed by microscopy. The patient should also
                                                        be evaluated for genital tract infections, including bacterial vaginosis,
                                                        chlamydia, and gonococcal infection, which predispose to PPROM.

              What is the most appropriate             The patient must be hospitalized and placed on electronic fetal
               treatment for this condition?            monitoring. If at any point the baby becomes unstable or if the mother
                                                        has already begun overt labor, the baby should be delivered. If the

OBSTETRICS
                                                        mother has a fever, urinary tract infection and upper respiratory
                                                        infection should be ruled out. Chorioamnionitis is a consideration but
                                                        is a diagnosis of exclusion; if no other source is found for the fever,
                                                        she should be treated with gentamicin plus clindamycin or ampicillin
                                                        plus gentamicin and delivered. If the baby and the mother are both
                                                        stable, the condition should be managed according to gestational age.
                                                        A fetus < 24 weeks will be nonviable, and labor should be induced.
                                                        If the fetus is between 24 and 34 weeks, the mother should be given
                                                        betamethasone to enhance fetal lung maturity, as well as antibiotics,
                                                        then observed until at least 32 weeks’ gestational age. If the fetus is
                                                        > 34 weeks, he or she should be delivered.
              What risk factors are associated         The single most common cause of PPROM is a genital infection.
               with an increased incidence of this      Other risk factors include a history of PPROM, antepartum bleeding,
               condition?                               and cigarette smoking.
              What are the most signiﬁcant             Complications of PPROM include intrauterine infection, such as
               complications of this condition?         chorioamnionitis or endometritis, premature delivery, placental
                                                        abruption, and prolapsed umbilical cord.
              How is chorioamnionitis                  A maternal fever > 38° C (100.4° F) is required for diagnosis. In
               diagnosed?                               addition, at least two of the following must be present:
                                                         Maternal WBC > 15,000/mm3
                                                         Maternal HR > 100/min
                                                         Fetal HR > 160/min
                                                         Uterine tenderness
                                                         Foul odor of amniotic ﬂuid

              Can chorioamnionitis occur               Yes, particularly with Listeria monocytogenes.
               without rupture of membranes?

             322
 CASE 26                    A 27-year-old G4P1 woman at 30 weeks’, 6 days’ gestation presents to the emergency
                             department complaining of headache, fever, chills, and dysuria that have been
                             worsening over the past 2 days. Two days ago, her temperature was 37.8° C (100.1° F),
                             but it has steadily increased since, and the last time she checked, her temperature
                             was 38.8° C (101.8° F). She denies blurry vision, abdominal pain, or dizziness. She
                             is unsure if she has had any recent vaginal discharge, but she has noticed mild and
                             intermittent spotting over the past several weeks. She additionally complains of urinary
                             frequency, but she states that ever since she began her second trimester, she has had
                             to urinate frequently, so she did not think that this recent worsening was abnormal.
                             On physical examination, the patient’s temperature is 38.4° C (101.1° F), her heart
                             rate is 108/min, and her blood pressure is 155/96 mm Hg. Her abdomen is soft, with
                             no suprapubic tenderness. She has mild pain at the costovertebral angles bilaterally.
                             Laboratory values reveal the following:
                             Hgb: 11.8 g/dL
                             WBC count: 15,700/mm3
                             Platelet count: 255,000/mm3
                             Na+: 140 mEq/L
                             K+: 3.7 mEq/L
                             Creatinine: 0.9 mg/dL

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       The patient’s symptoms of fever, chills, and dysuria combined with
                                           her costovertebral angle tenderness on physical examination and
                                           her elevated WBC suggest the diagnosis of pyelonephritis. This
                                           condition may have been precipitated by asymptomatic bacteriuria, an

                                                                                                                        OBSTETRICS
                                           uncomplicated urinary tract infection, or cystitis, which then ascended
                                           to involve the renal collecting system.

 What other laboratory tests would        To evaluate for pyelonephritis, a urinalysis and urine culture should
  be helpful in diagnosis?                 be obtained. Typically, a urinalysis will demonstrate elevated
                                           leukocyte esterase and nitrite, and the urine culture may provide a
                                           causative pathogen. Since women with urinary tract malformations
                                           or renal calculi are more at risk for developing pyelonephritis, a
                                           renal ultrasound may be indicated to evaluate for renal anomalies or
                                           pathology, including hydronephrosis.
 What is the most appropriate             In the nonpregnant state, pyelonephritis can be treated in the
  treatment for this condition?            outpatient setting for mild cases. Pregnant patients, however, require
                                           IV administration of antibiotics for at least 24–48 hours due to the
                                           increased risk of severe complications, such as bacteremia, sepsis, or
                                           acute respiratory distress syndrome. Antibiotic treatment is generally
                                           with a ﬁrst-generation cephalosporin such as cefazolin to provide
                                           adequate coverage for the common pathogens: Escherichia coli,
                                           enterococci, Proteus, and group B Streptococcus.
 What are common symptoms of              Patients with vaginal infections usually complain of vaginal discharge,
  vaginal infections?                      pain, or pruritus. This patient’s symptoms of urinary frequency and
                                           dysuria would be uncommon. Common causes of vaginal infections
                                           include Gardnerella vaginalis, Bacteroides, Candida, and sexually
                                           transmitted infections such as Trichomonas vaginalis. Other sexually
                                           transmitted infections, including Chlamydia, gonorrhea, HIV, syphilis,
                                           and human papillomavirus, are often asymptomatic in the initial stages
                                           and produce local or systemic symptoms at later stages.
 What is a normal creatinine value        Due to the increases in glomerular ﬁltration rate and renal plasma ﬂow
  during pregnancy?                        in pregnancy, serum creatinine levels decrease from a mean of 0.7 to a
                                           mean of 0.5. This patient’s was elevated secondary to pyelonephritis.

                                                                                                                  323
              CASE 27                     A 25-year-old G1 woman delivers a baby girl at 37 weeks’ gestation. The baby has
                                           a purpuric rash covering her entire body, a weak cry, and abnormally small eyes.
                                           On further examination, she is tachycardic with a machine-like murmur. Her
                                           ophthalmologic exam is notable for leukocoria and microopthalmia. Standard
                                           postpartum hearing tests are notable for bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Her mother
                                           is a recent immigrant from Guatemala. She reports having had a brief illness during her
                                           ﬁrst trimester with a low-grade fever, lymphadenopathy, and a maculopapular rash that
                                           began on the face and spread to the rest of her body before resolving spontaneously.

              What is the diagnosis for the             Congenital rubella.
               infant?

              What infections can be                    TORCH infections: Toxoplasmosis, Other (syphilis), Rubella,
               transmitted transplacentally or           Cytomegalovirus, Herpes/HIV. See Table 11-2.
               during the passage through the
               birth canal?
              What prenatal testing should this         Rubella and syphilis testing are recommended on the ﬁrst prenatal
               patient have received to prevent          visit. Additionally, maternal rubella immunization status should be
               TORCH infections?                         conﬁrmed.
              What is the reservoir for                 Domestic cats are the reservoir for this intracellular parasite.
               toxoplasmosis?
              What are the potential                    Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine are folic acid antagonists that may

OBSTETRICS
               complications of pyrimethamine/           cause bone marrow suppression.
               sulfadiazine treatment?
              Should the measles, mumps, and            This is a live attenuated virus; therefore, it is not recommended during
               rubella (MMR) vaccine be given            pregnancy. However, there have been no documented complications
               during pregnancy?                         from the administration of this vaccine, so termination of the
                                                         pregnancy should not be considered if the vaccine is inadvertently
                                                         given.

             324
TA B L E 11- 2 .   Overview of TORCH Infections

 INFECTION              TRANSMISSION              KEY FEATURES                           TREATMENT

   Toxoplasmosis        Placental                  Hydrocephalus                         Maternal infection: spiramycin
                                                   Chorioretinitis                       Fetal infection documented:
                                                   Intracranial calciﬁcations             pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine +
                                                                                           leukovorin

   Syphilis             Vaginal and placental      Deafness                             Penicillin G, even if the patient needs
                                                   Notched incisors                     to undergo desensitization secondary
                                                   Interstitial keratitis               to a penicillin allergy
                                                   Hepatosplenomegaly
                                                   Saber shins

   Rubella              Placental                  Petechial rash (“blueberry mufﬁn”)    Prevention: vaccination
                                                   Sensorineural deafness                Newborn: supportive
                                                   Cataracts, retinopathy                Fetal: maternal counseling of risks
                                                   Congenital heart disease

   Cytomegalovirus      Placental                  Microcephaly                         Parenteral ganciclovir
                                                   Thrombocytopenia
                                                   Jaundice
                                                   Periventricular calciﬁcations

                                                                                                                                   OBSTETRICS
   Herpes               Vaginal                    Vesicular rash                       Parenteral acyclovir
                                                   Retinopathy
                                                   Meningoencephalitis

                                                                                                                             325
              CASE 28                    A 34-year-old G3P3 woman is 20 days postpartum after a vaginal delivery that was
                                          complicated by a 1500-mL hemorrhage secondary to uterine atony. The patient did not
                                          respond to oxytocin or methylergonovine administration and experienced a 10-minute
                                          episode of sustained hypotension ranging from 62/30 to 71/25 mm Hg that required 10
                                          units of packed RBCs. The patient was ﬁnally stabilized after emergent uterine artery
                                          embolization. On postpartum day 2, the patient was found to have a creatinine level of
                                          1.8 mg/dL, which peaked at 3.5 mg/dL on postpartum day 7, and has since returned
                                          to baseline. The patient is currently feeling well but presents to her obstetrician
                                          complaining of an inability to lactate.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Sheehan’s syndrome, or postpartum pituitary necrosis, is characterized
                                                        by necrosis of the anterior pituitary secondary to ischemia from severe
                                                        obstetrical hemorrhage and hypotension. The posterior pituitary is
                                                        usually spared, while the larger and more vascular anterior pituitary
                                                        suffers what is usually irreversible damage. The most common clinical
                                                        feature of Sheehan’s syndrome is the inability to lactate postpartum
                                                        secondary to decreased prolactin production.

              What are other features of this          Other features of Sheehan’s syndrome include fatigue, cold
               condition?                               intolerance, hair loss secondary to hypothyroidism; amenorrhea and
                                                        breast atrophy secondary to hypogonadism; and nausea, vomiting, and
                                                        hypotension secondary to hypocortisolism.
              What is the epidemiology of this         Sheehan’s syndrome is a very uncommon complication of profound
               condition?                               obstetrical hemorrhage. The incidence of Sheehan’s syndrome is

OBSTETRICS
                                                        estimated at < 1 in 10,000 deliveries.
              What are the typical laboratory          Patients with Sheehan’s syndrome have decreased levels of all
               ﬁndings in this condition?               hormones produced by the anterior pituitary, including thyroid-
                                                        stimulating hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing
                                                        hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and prolactin. Some patients
                                                        may also experience a modest decrease in hormones released by the
                                                        posterior pituitary, although involvement of the posterior pituitary is
                                                        much less common.
              What are the typical CT scan             CT scan of the head demonstrates an abnormal-appearing pituitary
               ﬁndings in this condition?               gland with a totally or partially empty sella turcica.

              What is the most appropriate             Treatment of patients with pituitary insufﬁciency involves hormone
               treatment for this condition?            replacement with thyroxine, steroids, estrogens, and progesterones. For
                                                        patients with amenorrhea who desire fertility, ovulation induction can
                                                        usually achieve pregnancy. Patients often carry the pregnancy well and
                                                        without complications once treatment is administered.

             326
Gynecology

Case 1       328

Case 2       330

Case 3       331

Case 4       332

Case 5       334

Case 6       336

Case 7       338

Case 8       340

Case 9       342

Case 10      344

Case 11      345

Case 12      346

Case 13      347

Case 14      348

Case 15      350

Case 16      351

Case 17      352

Case 18      353

Case 19      354

Case 20      356

Case 21      357

                   327
               CASE 1                     A 17-year-old girl is referred to a reproductive endocrinologist by her pediatrician
                                           because she has not yet menstruated. Both her mother and grandmother started their
                                           periods at age 16. She is in the 30th percentile for height, 50th percentile for weight,
                                           and is otherwise healthy and preparing to start college in the fall. Physical examination
                                           reveals a temperature of 37° C (98.6° F), heart rate of 65/min, and blood pressure
                                           of 130/80 mm Hg. She is Tanner stage I, with no breast development or pubic hair.
                                           Speculum examination reveals normal prepubescent genitalia with a patent vagina and
                                           uterus palpated on rectoabdominal examination.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Primary amenorrhea, most likely due to Turner’s syndrome or
                                                          constitutional delay. Primary amenorrhea is the absence of menses
                                                          after age 16, while secondary amenorrhea is the cessation of
                                                          menstruation lasting at least 3 months after menarche. The workup
                                                          of primary amenorrhea is complex and is directed by the presence or
                                                          absence of breast and genital development.

               What are the major causes of this         See Table 12-1.
                condition?
               How should the workup proceed             This patient has not yet started puberty, so a workup must be done
                for this patient’s condition?             to identify the source of the pathology: hypothalamic, pituitary, or
                                                          gonadal. The ﬁrst step is to measure a follicle-stimulating hormone
                                                          (FSH) level. Elevated FSH suggests gonadal failure, while low FSH
                                                          suggests hypothalamic or pituitary dysfunction. If gonadal dysfunction

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                          is suspected, a karyotype should be obtained to rule out Turner’s
                                                          syndrome.
               What other aspects of the medical         Family history is very important in diagnosing amenorrhea because
                history should be investigated?           age at menarche tends to be conserved within families. Exercise, stress,
                                                          eating, and sexual history should be investigated. A history of anosmia
                                                          will point to Kallmann’s syndrome.
               What diagnostic tests could be            To conﬁrm normal internal genitalia, an ultrasound can be performed.
                used to conﬁrm the diagnosis?             Prolactin, thyroid hormone, and testosterone levels can be tested if
                                                          indicated. A pregnancy test is always recommended if the patient has
                                                          normal pubertal development. In patients with abnormal anatomy,
                                                          a karyotype of XY will reveal testicular feminization (androgen
                                                          insensitivity).

              328
TA B L E 12 - 1 .   Major Causes of Primary Amenorrhea

   ASSOCIATED FINDINGS                                    CAUSES

   Absent breast development, normal pelvic examination   Hypothalamic failure
                                                             Anorexia, excessive stress or exercise
                                                             Chronic illness (diabetes, etc.)
                                                             Gonadotropin deﬁciency
                                                             Kallmann’s syndrome (if anosmia)
                                                             Pituitary dysfunction after head trauma
                                                          Inﬁltrative or inﬂammatory process
                                                             Pituitary adenoma or craniopharyngioma
                                                             Gonadal failure
                                                             Gonadal dysgenesis
                                                             Turner’s syndrome (XO karyotype)
                                                             Premature ovarian failure (postradiation or chemotherapy)

   Normal breast development, normal pelvic examination   Hypothyroidism
                                                          Hyperprolactinemia
                                                          Pregnancy
                                                          Constitutional delay

   Normal breast development, abnormal pelvic             Testicular feminization or androgen insensitivity (XY karyotype)
   examination                                            Anatomic abnormalities

                                                                                                                               GYN ECOLOGY
                                                             Uterovaginal septum
                                                             Imperforate hymen

                                                                                                                         329
               CASE 2                      A 35-year-old G2P1 woman presents to her gynecologist claiming absence of
                                            menstruation for the past 4 consecutive months, except for occasional spotting. Her
                                            gynecologic history is notable for an incomplete miscarriage and therapeutic dilation
                                            and curettage (D&C) approximately 6 months ago, along with the birth of a child
                                            within the past year. She is currently not taking oral contraceptive pills (OCPs) and
                                            indicates that her periods have previously followed a regular cycle. She has a body
                                            mass index (BMI) of 24, her pulse is 84/min, and blood pressure is 120/75 mm Hg. On
                                            gynecologic exam, the physician notes that the patient expresses discomfort; the patient
                                            indicates that she has noticed her vagina is drier than normal and that this has inhibited
                                            her sexual activity. The physician does not note any other gynecologic abnormalities on
                                            exam.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?         Secondary amenorrhea. Secondary amenorrhea is deﬁned as the
                                                           cessation of menstruation for at least 6 months (in those with irregular
                                                           periods) or for at least three of the previous cycle intervals, in a woman
                                                           who has had at least one normal period. A patient who has primary
                                                           amenorrhea has never menstruated; this form of amenorrhea may be
                                                           accompanied by the absence of secondary sex characteristics. (See
                                                           Case 1, Primary Amenorrhea.)

               What are some of the underlying             Pregnancy or lactation
                causes of this condition?                   Premature ovarian failure
                                                            Hyperprolactinemia
                                                            Thyroid dysfunction

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                            Menopause
                                                            Exercise/stress/eating disorders
                                                            Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
                                                            Asherman’s syndrome
                                                            Medications

               What is the next step in the               The ﬁrst step is administration of a pregnancy test. The clinician
                evaluation and diagnosis of this           should also determine if this patient is currently breast-feeding, since
                patient?                                   she does have a child less than 1 year old and lactational amenorrhea
                                                           can occur. If the pregnancy test is negative, the next step is to obtain
                                                           thyroid function tests, luteinizing hormone/follicle-stimulating
                                                           hormone (FSH), and prolactin levels. Elevated prolactin levels (> 5000
                                                           mIU/L) would most likely indicate a pituitary adenoma. Low FSH
                                                           could indicate a pituitary tumor or hypothalamic disease. High levels
                                                           of FSH and low estrogen could indicate premature ovarian failure
                                                           (deﬁned as amenorrhea, hypoestrogenism, and elevated gondatropins
                                                           in women < 40 years old). Since this patient also received a D&C
                                                           fairly recently, Asherman’s should be considered. Trauma to the basal
                                                           layer of the endometrium following a D&C results in intrauterine
                                                           scarring; scarring across the cervix or lower part of the uterus can block
                                                           menstruation. If Asherman’s is suspected, the clinician should perform
                                                           a hysteroscopy to conﬁrm the diagnosis. Lab values will be within
                                                           normal limits in a patient with Asherman’s.
               What is the most appropriate               If the patient’s secondary amenorrhea is a result of Asherman’s
                treatment for this condition?              syndrome, hysteroscopy and/or laparoscopy must be employed to
                                                           dissect the scar tissue/adhesions; this can be followed by estrogen
                                                           therapy postoperatively. All patients with Asherman’s have an increased
                                                           risk of placenta accreta, uterine rupture, and premature delivery.

              330
 CASE 3                      A 55-year-old postmenopausal woman presents to her primary care physician for an
                              annual physical examination. She has no complaints and feels healthy. On physical
                              examination, she is afebrile (37.0° C [98.6° F]), with a heart rate of 80/min and blood
                              pressure of 140/85 mm Hg. During the breast examination, a small, hard, ﬁxed nodule
                              is palpated in the upper outer quadrant of the left breast. The skin on the breast is
                              without abnormality, there is no nipple discharge, and no abnormal lymph nodes are
                              palpated. She is sent for a diagnostic mammogram, which reveals a 3-cm nodule with
                              microcalciﬁcations. A core-needle biopsy is scheduled, and the pathology report is read
                              as “invasive ductal carcinoma without clear margins, estrogen receptor positive (ER+),
                              HER2/neu receptor negative.”

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        This patient has breast cancer, stage not yet determined. All new breast
                                            lumps found on breast examination or mammogram must be biopsied
                                            in patients > 35 years of age. The clinical features of this lump (hard,
                                            ﬁxed) suggest cancer rather than a benign cyst or adenoma.

 How is this condition staged?             Breast cancer is staged by the TNM (tumor, node, metastasis)
                                            classiﬁcation system, which is simpliﬁed as follows:
                                             Stage I—tumor < 2 cm and node negative.
                                             Stage II—tumor 2–5 cm.
                                             Stage III—tumor > 5 cm or ﬁxed axillary node involvement.
                                             Stage IV—any distant metastases or direct extension to the chest wall
                                              or skin.

                                                                                                                           GYN ECOLOGY
 What risk factors are associated          Breast cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading
  with an increased incidence of            cause of cancer death in women. One of the most important risk
  this condition?                           factors is estrogen exposure; early menarche, late menopause, and
                                            nulliparity therefore contribute to increased risk. Most women have
                                            no identiﬁable risk factors other than age and gender, but there is an
                                            association with a personal or family (ﬁrst-degree relative) history of
                                            breast cancer or BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations.
 What is the most appropriate next         In patients with small, isolated carcinomas, breast conservation therapy
  step in management?                       (lumpectomy plus adjuvant radiation) is equally effective when
                                            compared with mastectomy. Whichever surgical approach is chosen,
                                            sentinel lymph node sampling should be done during the procedure.
                                            At this early stage, metastatic workup requires a complete blood count
                                            and liver function tests, with optional bone scan. A CT scan of the
                                            chest and pelvis is indicated in stage III patients.
 What pharmacologic treatments             Adjuvant chemotherapy and/or hormonal therapy have been shown
  are available for this patient?           to improve outcome and prevent recurrence in early-stage breast
                                            cancer. This patient is ER+, so she would beneﬁt from hormonal
                                            therapy with either tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor (anastrozole).
                                            Anastrozole is indicated only in postmenopausal patients. All patients
                                            with stage II or higher receptor-positive cancers would beneﬁt from a
                                            course of chemotherapy before the start of hormone therapy. Patients
                                            with overexpression of HER2/neu would beneﬁt from trastuzumab, a
                                            monoclonal antibody to the HER2/neu receptor.
 What is the prognosis for patients        Breast cancer in its early stages is curable, with 5-year survival rates for
  with this condition?                      strictly localized receptor-positive tumors being > 90%. Stage IV disease
                                            is almost always fatal.

                                                                                                                   331
               CASE 4                    A 26-year-old engaged woman presents with the complaint of a foul-smelling vaginal
                                          discharge. She denies any vulvar pruritus or dyspareunia, although she has noticed the
                                          presence of a thin, grayish discharge. Physical examination reveals an afebrile, well-
                                          appearing, slightly anxious young woman with a blood pressure of 125/85 mm Hg
                                          and heart rate of 80/min. A pelvic examination shows watery, grayish discharge with a
                                          vaginal pH > 4.5. Mixing the discharge with potassium hydroxide produces a ﬁshy odor.
                                          Results of a wet prep for microscopic evaluation are shown in Figure 12-1.

GYN ECOLOGY
                                          FIGURE 12-1.      (Reproduced, with permission, from Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski
                                          S, Ma OJ, Cline DM. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 6th ed.
                                          New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 108-1.)

               What is the most likely diagnosis?      Bacterial vaginosis (BV). BV is the most common cause of vaginitis
                                                        in women of childbearing age, although it is often called “vaginosis”
                                                        rather than “vaginitis” due to the absence of inﬂammation. It is
                                                        not a sexually transmitted disease. The condition is thought to arise
                                                        when there is a shift in the normal vaginal ﬂora, with a reduction of
                                                        lactobacilli and an increase in other organisms such as Gardnerella
                                                        vaginalis, Mobiluncus species, Mycoplasma hominis, and anaerobic
                                                        gram-negative rods such as Bacteroides and Peptostreptococcus species.
                                                        Thus, any condition that leads to an imbalance of the normal vaginal
                                                        ﬂora, such as antibiotic administration or pregnancy, can increase the
                                                        risk of BV.

               What are the diagnostic criteria        Three of the four following criteria must be met:
                for this condition?                      Clue cells on saline wet mount. Clue cells are vaginal epithelial cells
                                                          with adherent coccobacilli seen on the edge of the cells (as shown in
                                                          Figure 12-1); they are pathognomonic for BV.
                                                         Vaginal pH > 4.5.
                                                         Positive “whiff test” (presence of a ﬁshy odor when KOH is added to a
                                                          sample of vaginal discharge).
                                                         Homogenous gray-white discharge.

              332
 What is the most appropriate      All symptomatic women as well as asymptomatic women undergoing
  treatment for this condition?     certain gynecologic procedures (hysterectomy, abortion) should be
                                    treated with oral or intravaginal metronidazole or clindamycin, as the
                                    presence of BV in these surgical patients has been linked to a greater
                                    incidence of pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID). For recurrent BV, the
                                    treatment of sexual partners can be considered.
 What are possible complications   BV is associated with an increased risk of preterm labor and delivery in
  from this condition?              affected pregnant women, increased acquisition and transmitting HIV,
                                    and postpartum endometritis. BV is more common in women with
                                    PID, but it does not appear to be independently causal.
 What are possible complications   Patients taking oral metronidazole should avoid alcohol, as it can
  from the treatment of this        lead to a disulﬁram-like reaction, with ﬂushing, headaches, nausea,
  condition?                        vomiting, sweating, or tachycardia. Disulﬁram-like reactions have not
                                    been reported with topical metronidazole use.

                                                                                                               GYN ECOLOGY

                                                                                                        333
               CASE 5                     A 45-year-old G4P3 woman presents to her gynecologist complaining of a 3-month
                                           history of spotting and postcoital bleeding. She takes no medication and has not seen
                                           a doctor in 10 years. Her last Pap smear was 15 years ago; she thinks it was normal. On
                                           physical examination she is afebrile, with a heart rate of 80/min and blood pressure
                                           of 130/80 mm Hg. Speculum examination reveals normal external genitalia and
                                           normal vaginal mucosa, but the cervix has a 2-cm friable lesion protruding from the os.
                                           Bimanual examination reveals a retroverted uterus with no masses palpated.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Invasive cervical carcinoma. Cervical carcinoma is rare in the
                                                         developed world because of widespread screening protocols. It is
                                                         usually caught before symptoms develop, but a common presentation
                                                         of advanced cervical cancer includes vaginal discharge, metrorrhagia,
                                                         postcoital bleeding, and pain.

               How is this condition staged?            Pap smear abnormalities are reported using the Bethesda classiﬁcation,
                                                         which rates abnormal cells as being of unknown signiﬁcance, low- or
                                                         high-grade intraepithelial lesions, or carcinoma. Histologic diagnosis
                                                         from a biopsy will report levels of cervical intraepithelial neoplasm
                                                         (CIN I, II, and III represent mild, moderate, or severe dysplasia,
                                                         respectively) that precede carcinoma. Once the diagnosis of cancer
                                                         is made, the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
                                                         (FIGO) staging system is as follows:
                                                          Stage 0—carcinoma in situ (preinvasive).
                                                          Stage I—conﬁned to the cervix.

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                          Stage II—extending to upper two-thirds of vagina and uterus.
                                                          Stage III—extending to lower vagina or pelvic sidewall.
                                                          Stage IV—spreading to adjacent or distant organs.

               What risk factors are associated         The most important risk factor for cervical cancer is infection with
                with an increased incidence of           oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16, 18, or 31. A greater
                this condition?                          number of sexual partners increases the risk of contracting HPV and
                                                         thus cervical cancer. Other associated risk factors are lack of screening,
                                                         multiparity, smoking, and HIV infection.
               What is the most appropriate             The treatment modalities used for precancerous lesions include
                treatment for this condition?            observation, colposcopy with directed biopsy, loop electrocautery,
                                                         cryotherapy, and cone biopsy. See Table 12-2. Once a lesion is visible
                                                         and highly suspicious for carcinoma (as in this patient), a biopsy
                                                         is taken and an examination under anesthesia is done for clinical
                                                         staging. Treatment involves surgery with or without radiation and
                                                         chemotherapy. Stage III and IV cancers are treated with chemotherapy
                                                         and radiation alone.
               How may this condition be                Pap smear screening is the best tool against cervical cancer because of
                prevented?                               the predictable, slow progression before invasive carcinoma develops,
                                                         and intervention at one of the earlier stages can be curative. Current
                                                         recommendations are that annual screening begin within
                                                         3 years of initiation of sexual activity or age 21, while women 30 years
                                                         and older can increase the interval to 2–3 years if they have had three
                                                         consecutive normal Pap smears. HPV testing can be used in the
                                                         management of minimally abnormal Pap smears and as an additional
                                                         screening test for women > 30 years of age.

              334
TA B L E 12 - 2 .   Diagnostic Screening of Precancerous Lesions

                             ADOLESCENTS (20 Years         WOMEN < 30   WOMEN > 30 YEARS
                             Old and Younger)              YEARS OLD    OLD                  PREGNANT WOMEN

   Abnormal squamous         Repeat Pap smear in 12        If HPV       Managed same as      If HPV positive, may perform
   cells of undetermined     months. Colposcopy if still   positive,    women under 30;      colposcopy, but strong
   signiﬁcance (ASCUS)       positive                      perform      only difference is   recommendation to wait 6
                                                           colposcopy   with negative HPV    weeks postpartum
                                                                        testing can reduce
                                                                        screening to once
                                                                        every 2–3 years

   Low-grade squamous        Repeat Pap smear in 12        Colposcopy                        Colposcopy recommended.
   intraepithelial lesion    months. Colposcopy if still                                     Note that endocervical
   (LSIL)                    positive                                                        curettage is contraindicated

   High-grade squamous       Loop electrosurgical                                            Same as above; note that
   intraepithelial lesion    excision procedure (LEEP)                                       invasive carcinoma will
   (HSIL)                    or colposcopy                                                   require aggressive treatment
                                                                                             despite pregnancy

                                                                                                                              GYN ECOLOGY

                                                                                                                        335
               CASE 6                    A 22-year-old woman presents to the health clinic complaining of fever and malaise.
                                          Upon further questioning she admits to a foul vaginal discharge, vulvar pain, and
                                          pain with urination. She recently returned home from a study abroad program
                                          in Southeast Asia and admits to being sexually active with another student in her
                                          program. Her temperature is 38.6° C (101.5° F). There is signiﬁcant tender left-sided
                                          lymphadenopathy in the inguinal region. Examination of the external genitalia reveals
                                          three painful, well-demarcated soft ulcers on the labia majora and minora. The ulcers
                                          have ragged edges and necrotic bases. Pelvic examination reveals a foul-smelling
                                          purulent discharge.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?      Chancroid. Chancroid is a sexually transmitted infection caused by
                                                        the gram-negative bacillus Haemophilus ducreyi. The infection is
                                                        spread by direct sexual contact when the organism invades an open
                                                        lesion; the organism cannot invade intact tissue. Chancroid, along with
                                                        granuloma inguinale, is most common in developing or third-world
                                                        countries; thus, these organisms are most often seen in the United
                                                        States in patients with a recent travel history to those countries. It is
                                                        important to differentiate a chancroid from the primary chancre of
                                                        syphilis, although the chancre is usually painless.

               How is the diagnosis made?              Chancroid is generally diagnosed clinically, as it is difﬁcult to isolate
                                                        the causative organism, H. ducreyi. In some patients, the swollen
                                                        inguinal lymph nodes (usually unilateral) may break through the skin
                                                        and produce draining abscesses. These abscesses are called buboes, and

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                        aspirated pus from a bubo provides the best material for culturing and
                                                        isolating the organism. Polymerase chain reaction of genital samples is
                                                        becoming a more widely available form of testing.
               What other infections should be         Patients presenting with genital ulcers should be screened for other
                considered in a patient with this       sexually transmitted infections such as chlamydia, gonorrhea, HIV,
                condition?                              hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus. Genital ulcers are an important
                                                        factor in the spread of HIV, as HIV-negative persons with genital ulcers
                                                        have higher rates of acquisition, and HIV-positive persons with genital
                                                        ulcers transmit HIV more effectively.
               How do the genital lesions in           See Table 12-3.
                this condition compare to those
                in other sexually transmitted
                diseases?
               What is the most appropriate            The best treatment option is one dose of azithromycin (1 g by mouth)
                treatment for this condition?           or ceftriaxone (250 mg intramuscularly). Ciproﬂoxacin (500 mg by
                                                        mouth twice a day for 3 days) is another option, but less desirable given
                                                        the multidose requirement.

              336
TA B L E 12 - 3 .   Differential Diagnosis of Genital Ulcerative Lesions

                         GRANULOMA                                   HERPES SIMPLEX     LYMPHOGRANULOMA
                         INGUINALE             CHANCROID             VIRUS (HSV)        VENEREUM                SYPHILIS

   Causative agent       Calymmato-            Haemophilus           HSV type 2 (most   Chlamydia               Treponema
                         bacterium             ducreyi               cases)             trachomatis L1–L3       pallidum
                         granulomatis

   Appearance/           Granulomatous         Irregular, deep,      Multiple, small    Small, shallow          Indurated,
   characteristics of    ulcers with rolled    well demarcated,      grouped vesicles   rapidly healing         smooth borders
   lesions               edges                 nonindurated          on erythematous    ulcers; usually not     on a clean base
                                               ulcers                base               observed

   Pain                  No                    Yes                   Yes                No                      No

   Adenopathy            Pseudobuboes          Inguinal;             Reactive nodes     Matted clusters,        Regional,
                                               unilateral, painful                      often bilateral,        nontender
                                                                                        painful buboes

   Other                 Over 50% of                                                    Women rarely
                         patients have                                                  notice this lesion in
                         lesions in the anal                                            primary stage (3–12
                         area                                                           days or longer)

                                                                                                                                   GYN ECOLOGY

                                                                                                                             337
               CASE 7                     A 32-year-old woman presents with a chief complaint of bilateral breast pain, with
                                           greater pain in her right than left breast. The patient’s maternal grandmother had breast
                                           cancer at age 60, but otherwise there is no family history of breast or ovarian cancer.
                                           On physical examination, the patient’s breasts appear symmetric, without dimpling,
                                           rashes, or nipple inversion or discharge. Her breasts are tender to palpation bilaterally,
                                           and several 2–3-cm masses are palpated in her upper outer right breast. The masses are
                                           movable and round, with discrete borders and a “rubbery” feel. The patient reports that
                                           the pain increases toward the latter part of her menstrual cycle and that she is currently
                                           not taking any contraceptives.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Fibrocystic breast disease. This benign source of breast pain most
                                                          frequently occurs in women aged 30–50, with resolution of symptoms
                                                          occurring at menopause. Symptoms worsen throughout the latter part
                                                          of the menstrual cycle, due to the associated increase in estrogen. The
                                                          pain usually occurs in both breasts, and patients will complain that
                                                          their breasts feel “heavy,” “lumpy,” or otherwise tender. The breast
                                                          “masses” in ﬁbrocystic disease are movable and of a rubbery or cystlike
                                                          consistency, can change shape, and usually have smooth borders.
                                                          While nipple discharge is not a usual symptom, it can occur.

               What conditions should be                 The clinician should be able to differentiate between a ﬁbrocystic mass
                included in the differential              and ﬁbroadenoma or malignant breast cancer. Missed breast cancer
                diagnosis?                                diagnoses are among the most frequent malpractice claims, and a
                                                          diagnosis of ﬁbrocystic disease should not preclude a thorough exam

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                          and workup for underlying malignant causes. A patient with breast
                                                          cancer would most likely present with a hard, ﬁxed, and irregular
                                                          mass. Most breast cancers are painless (excluding inﬂammatory breast
                                                          cancer), and nipple discharge is more likely depending on what type
                                                          or stage of breast cancer is present. A ﬁbroadenoma, though benign,
                                                          can be hard to distinguish from ﬁbrocystic disease on physical exam,
                                                          but ﬁbroadenomas are usually painless. They also most frequently
                                                          occur in women under the age of 35. Malignant degeneration of a
                                                          ﬁbroadenoma occurs in less than 1% of patients; this malignant form of
                                                          ﬁbroadenoma is known as cytosarcoma phyllodes.
               What is the most appropriate next         The patient has two dominant, palpable breast masses > 1 cm in
                step in diagnosis?                        diameter. The physician can proceed either with ultrasound or
                                                          ﬁne-needle aspiration (FNA). If the mass cannot be visualized on
                                                          ultrasound, or if imaging reveals a complex cyst or solid mass, the
                                                          patient should undergo a core-needle biopsy (mammograms in this
                                                          age group are usually not recommended, due to the density of breast
                                                          tissue). If the mass appears to be a simple cyst on ultrasound, the
                                                          physician may perform an FNA and repeat a breast exam in 4–6 weeks.
                                                          If the aspirate is bloody or the mass does not resolve after FNA, the
                                                          patient should receive a core-needle biopsy (or mammogram if over
                                                          the age of 40). If the FNA reveals the presence of a solid mass, the
                                                          physician should be most concerned about a malignant tumor, and
                                                          core-needle biopsy should be performed.

              338
 What is the most appropriate    Once the diagnosis of ﬁbrocystic breast disease is conﬁrmed, this
  treatment for this condition?   patient should be encouraged to continue breast self-exams and
                                  alert the physician of any changes. The patient should return to the
                                  ofﬁce in 4–6 weeks, and the drained cystic area should be examined
                                  for resolution. Dietary changes may also help this patient cope
                                  with ﬁbrocystic pain. Reducing salt intake and caffeine and taking
                                  nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and vitamin E supplements
                                  all may provide relief. Prescribing oral contraceptives may also help
                                  alleviate breast pain in this patient; they have been reported to help
                                  over 70% of women in alleviation of symptoms.

                                                                                                             GYN ECOLOGY

                                                                                                       339
               CASE 8                    A 29-year-old nulligravid woman presents to her gynecologist complaining of pelvic
                                          pain, dyspareunia, and heavy cramping and back pain during her menses. On physical
                                          examination, she has a heart rate of 75/min and blood pressure of 125/80 mm Hg.
                                          Pelvic examination reveals a normal cervix, with tenderness of the posterior fornix on
                                          bimanual examination. No masses are palpated. Gonorrhea and chlamydia cultures are
                                          negative, as is a pregnancy test.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?      Endometriosis. In endometriosis, isolated implants of endometrial
                                                        tissue are found outside of the uterine lining, scattered in the pelvic
                                                        cavity; see Figure 12-2 for the sites most commonly involved. These
                                                        estrogen-dependent implants cause dysmenorrhea and can result
                                                        in extensive scarring and pelvic pain. With pregnancy and pelvic
                                                        inﬂammatory disease (PID) ruled out, this diagnosis is suggested by her
                                                        typical symptoms.

               What tests and/or imaging tools         Laparoscopy, with direct visualization and biopsy of suspected lesions,
                could be used to conﬁrm the             is used to conﬁrm cases of endometriosis. Typical lesions have a
                diagnosis?                              “raspberry” or “powder-burned” appearance, while implants on the
                                                        ovary are known as endometriomas or “chocolate cysts.” While the
                                                        disease is graded (minimal, mild, moderate, severe) based on pathology,
                                                        symptom severity is not well correlated with the number of lesions.
                                                        Endometriosis is more prevalent in Asians and whites than African-
                                                        Americans and is most frequently diagnosed in women aged 25–35.

GYN ECOLOGY
               What is the most appropriate            Treatment of endometriosis is divided into medical and surgical
                treatment for this condition?           options. When nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs do not offer
                                                        relief, medical management focuses on mimicking the states of
                                                        pregnancy and menopause during which the disease often remits.
                                                        Thus, options include oral contraceptive pills (OCPs, combined or
                                                        progesterone only), danazol (an androgen with progestin-like activity),
                                                        and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs (nafarelin or
                                                        leuprolide, which suppress the gonadal axis at the pituitary). Because
                                                        diagnostic laparoscopy is so commonly performed, lesions are often
                                                        ablated at the same time. However, in severe cases, hysterectomy and
                                                        oophorectomy can be performed if fertility is not desired.
               What adverse events are associated      OCPs are well tolerated and can be used for a long duration if fertility
                with treatment?                         is not desired. Danazol and GnRH analogs have more severe side
                                                        effects; their use is limited to 4–9 months. Adverse effects of danazol
                                                        include weight gain, acne, and hirsutism. GnRH agonists induce a
                                                        “pseudomenopause” with all the associated symptoms: vasomotor
                                                        activity, vaginal dryness, and decreased bone mineral density. Add-back
                                                        therapy with estrogens or progestins can decrease these adverse effects
                                                        and increase the possible duration of therapy.
               What are possible complications         Severe endometriosis can cause infertility, disabling pain, and bowel
                of this disorder?                       or urinary obstruction. An associated disorder, adenomyosis, is the
                                                        presence of endometrial glands within the myometrium of the uterus,
                                                        with major symptoms of dysmenorrhea and menorrhagia.

              340
                                                                               GYN ECOLOGY
FIGURE 12-2.       Frequent sites of deposits in endometriosis. (Reproduced,
with permission, from Doherty GM, Way LW. Current Surgical Diagnosis and
Treatment, 12th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 41-1.)

                                                                       341
               CASE 9                    A 32-year-old African-American G0 woman presents to her gynecologist for her annual
                                          examination. She complains of increased fatigue over the past year and thinks her
                                          periods may be heavier than before. She also notes increasing dysmenorrhea. Menarche
                                          was at age 9, and she denies previous problems with her periods. She has generally
                                          been healthy and takes hydrochlorothiazide for high blood pressure. On physical
                                          examination, she appears pale and tired. Vital signs include heart rate of 105/min and
                                          blood pressure of 120/78 mm Hg. Cardiac, lung, and abdominal exams are within
                                          normal limits. On pelvic exam, there is no discharge or cervical motion tenderness.
                                          Her uterus feels enlarged to 12-week size and misshapen. Laboratory tests reveal a
                                          hemoglobin of 8.7 g/dL and hematocrit of 27%.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?      Uterine leiomyomata, or ﬁbroids, leading to menorrhagia and iron-
                                                        deﬁciency anemia. These monoclonal growths of uterine smooth
                                                        muscle are the most common benign neoplasm of the female genital
                                                        tract. Malignant transformation to leiomyosarcoma is extremely rare.

               How is this condition classiﬁed?        Fibroids are classiﬁed based on their location in the uterine wall:
                                                         Intramural: found within the uterine wall.
                                                         Submucosal: develop just below the endometrium and may protrude
                                                          into the uterine cavity; most likely to interfere with fertility and cause
                                                          bleeding.
                                                         Subserosal: originate just below the serosal surface; may have a broad
                                                          or pedunculated base.
                                                        Fibroid location can be most clearly delineated by MRI.

GYN ECOLOGY
               What is the epidemiology of this        Fibroids are extremely common, found in ~80% of hysterectomy
                condition?                              specimens. The disease is slightly more prevalent and seems to be more
                                                        severe in African Americans, who typically present with disease in their
                                                        20s, versus Caucasians, who present in their 30s. Risk factors include:
                                                         Early menarche (< 10 years).
                                                         Family history.
                                                         Polycystic ovarian syndrome.
                                                         Hypertension, especially in African-Americans.

                                                        The following factors are thought to be protective:
                                                         Parity (pregnancies beyond 20 weeks).
                                                         Use of oral contraceptives.

               How can this condition present?         The majority of ﬁbroids are asymptomatic. When symptoms do result,
                                                        they fall into three major categories.
                                                         Increased uterine bleeding
                                                         Pelvic pressure and pain
                                                         Reproductive dysfunction

                                                        Increased bleeding due to ﬁbroids occurs only during a woman’s period;
                                                        intermenstrual bleeding necessitates a workup for endometrial pathology.
                                                        Symptoms typically abate with menopause, as ﬁbroids shrink.

              342
 What is the most appropriate    Treatment of ﬁbroids depends on the woman’s desire for childbearing
  treatment for this condition?   and the severity of symptoms. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs
                                  can be taken for ﬁbroid-associated pain. Other pharmacologic
                                  management includes medroxyprogesterone acetate or danazol to
                                  control bleeding. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs can
                                  decrease myoma size and growth, thus decreasing symptoms. Women
                                  with severe symptoms who still desire fertility should undergo
                                  myomectomy; those who have completed childbearing can have a total
                                  or subtotal abdominal or vaginal hysterectomy.

                                                                                                        GYN ECOLOGY

                                                                                                 343
               CASE 10                    A 21-year-old sexually active college student visits the student health ofﬁce complaining
                                           of “bumps” on the posterior introitus. She denies dyspareunia, vulvar itching, change
                                           in vaginal discharge, or dysuria. She admits to having multiple sexual partners. She uses
                                           oral contraceptive pills; her partners use condoms rarely. On physical examination,
                                           there are multiple 2–3-mm ﬂesh-colored, pedunculated papules on the posterior
                                           introitus and the labia.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Condyloma acuminata (genital warts). Genital warts are caused by
                                                          the human papillomavirus (HPV), of which there are more than
                                                          70 subtypes. Certain subtypes, such as HPV 16 and 18, are able to
                                                          integrate into the host genome and have been strongly associated
                                                          with squamous cell carcinomas including cervical and anal cancers.
                                                          Subtypes 6 and 11 are considered low risk for causing malignant
                                                          changes and are most frequently associated with benign condylomas.

               What risk factors are associated           History of sexually transmitted diseases.
                with an increased incidence of             Immunosuppression such as HIV infection.
                this condition?                            Multiple sexual partners.
                                                           Preexisting vaginitis.
                                                           Pregnancy.
                                                           Diabetes.

                                                          The disease can be acquired through sexual activity as well as contact
                                                          via digital/anal, oral/anal, or digital/vaginal routes.

GYN ECOLOGY
               What is the most appropriate              There are three approaches to treating this condition: chemical/
                treatment for this condition?             physical destruction, immunologic therapy, or surgical excision. The
                                                          number and extent of lesions should be considered when choosing a
                                                          therapy. For lesions that do not respond, an excisional biopsy should
                                                          be performed to rule out malignancy. Initial treatment options
                                                          include topical podophyllin or trichloroacetic acid followed by home
                                                          treatments of imiquimod (an immune modulator) or podoﬁlox.
                                                          Cryotherapy, laser therapy, or surgical excision may be considered for
                                                          lesions that do not respond to topical therapies or cover an extensive
                                                          area.
               What are the potential                    Untreated lesions may grow to the point of requiring surgical excision.
                complications if this condition is        Although the HPV subtypes associated with genital warts do not
                untreated?                                generally cause malignant changes, the patient may be coinfected
                                                          with other subtypes with a malignant potential. Pap smears should
                                                          be performed on women to look for evidence of cervical dysplasia or
                                                          neoplasia.

              344
 CASE 11                   A 44-year-old woman presents to her gynecologist complaining of menstrual irregularity.
                            In the past year, she has missed four periods, and her menstrual ﬂow has been lighter
                            than usual. She has not noticed the presence of clots and denies spotting between
                            periods or after intercourse. She reports frequent headaches, difﬁculties sleeping, and
                            mood swings. She denies the presence of hot ﬂashes, decrease in libido, or vaginal
                            dryness. She does not take oral contraceptives (OCPs) and has never had gynecologic
                            surgery. Physical examination reveals no abnormalities.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Perimenopause. This is the transitional period that occurs before
                                          a woman becomes completely amenhorrheic. To be classiﬁed
                                          as menopausal, a woman must experience at least 12 months of
                                          amenorrhea. Perimenopause is marked by various menopausal
                                          symptoms, accompanied by erratic menstruation. This period can
                                          extend as long as 10 years prior to menopause.

 What other symptoms are                  Mood disturbance
  common in patients with this             Sleep disturbances
  condition?                               Hot ﬂashes
                                           Depression/difﬁculty with concentration
                                           Osteoporosis
                                           Urinary incontinence/frequency
                                           Urogenital atrophy/vaginal dryness

 What is the most appropriate next       Although follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels can be obtained

                                                                                                                        GYN ECOLOGY
  step in diagnosis?                      to conﬁrm the onset of menopause, they are unreliable throughout
                                          perimenopause because FSH is intermittently elevated and ﬂuctuates
                                          greatly throughout this time period. Consistently elevated FSH levels
                                          (> 30 IU/L) are indicative of menopause, in addition to amenorrhea
                                          of at least a year’s duration. A clinician making a diagnosis of
                                          perimenopause based on symptomatology should be aware of other
                                          possible causes of irregular menstruation in a woman of this age.
                                          Pregnancy must still be ruled out, and patients should be screened for
                                          ﬁbroids, thyroid disease, and endometrial cancer.
 What is the most appropriate            Many women go through perimenopause without utilizing
  treatment for this condition?           medications. Women can be prescribed OCPs to stabilize hormonal
                                          ﬂuctuations and antidepressants to stabilize mood swings. Physicians
                                          can counsel women to make lifestyle changes that will make the
                                          transition into menopause easier; exercising regularly, minimizing
                                          caffeine intake, and starting herbal treatments may all provide relief
                                          from menopausal symptoms. It is also important to advise patients that
                                          they still must use a form of contraception while in perimenopause,
                                          since they are not anovulatory until they actually enter menopause.
                                          Many women choose to take hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to
                                          reduce the symptoms of menopause. Women who have not undergone
                                          a hysterectomy usually receive estrogen/progestin therapy (unopposed
                                          estrogen increases the risk for endometrial cancer), while women who
                                          have undergone hysterectomies can receive estrogen-only therapy.
                                          While HRT reduces the incidence of osteoporosis in this population, it
                                          also can increase the risk of blood clots, stroke, breast cancer, and heart
                                          disease, so short-term treatment is recommended.

                                                                                                                345
               CASE 12                    A 55-year-old postmenopausal G1P1 woman presents to her primary care physician
                                           complaining of fatigue, abdominal discomfort, and bloating. She has mild nausea and
                                           anorexia, but no vomiting. On physical examination, she has a temperature of 38° C
                                           (100.4° F), heart rate of 85/min, respiratory rate of 18/min, and blood pressure of 130/80
                                           mm Hg. Abdominal examination reveals distention, shifting dullness, a ﬂuid wave, and
                                           slight tenderness to palpation with no masses. Head and neck, cardiovascular, chest,
                                           and musculoskeletal examinations are all unremarkable. Pelvic examination reveals
                                           normal external genitalia and cervix, but a ﬁxed, nodular mass is palpated on the left
                                           adnexa. A transvaginal ultrasound reveals a 5-cm mass with cystic and solid elements on
                                           the left ovary and ﬂuid in the cul-de-sac. No abnormalities are appreciated on the right
                                           ovary. CA-125 level is 150 U, while complete blood count and electrolyte panel are
                                           within normal limits.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Ovarian cancer. While most ovarian masses are benign, ovarian cancer
                                                         is the ﬁfth leading cause of cancer death in women. Clues that this
                                                         mass is malignant rather than benign are the presence of ascites; a
                                                         ﬁxed, palpable mass > 5 cm; a complex, rather than simple, cystic
                                                         composition; and a CA-125 level > 35 U.

               What risk factors are associated         Ovarian cancer is rare, with risk related to the total number of
                with an increased incidence of           ovulation events. Thus, nulliparity and delayed childbearing are risk
                this condition?                          factors, while oral contraceptive pills are protective. Carriers of BRCA1
                                                         and BRCA2 mutations are at high risk and are the only individuals for
                                                         whom screening is advocated. Ovarian cancer is also a feature of the

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                         Lynch II syndrome of familial malignancies.
               How is this condition classiﬁed?          Stage I—growth limited to ovaries.
                                                          Stage II—growth extending to pelvis or presence of ascites.
                                                          Stage III—peritoneal or omental implants or inguinal or
                                                            retroperitoneal nodes.
                                                          Stage IV—distant metastases, including malignant pleural effusion.

                                                         Most cases are not diagnosed until they cause clinical symptoms,
                                                         usually already stage III or IV. If ovarian cancer is diagnosed before
                                                         spread outside the ovaries, over 90% of patients will survive > 5 years.
               What is the most appropriate next        A staging and debulking procedure should be scheduled as soon as
                step in management?                      possible. As part of the preoperative workup, a CT scan of the abdomen
                                                         and pelvis should be done to further evaluate the mass and look for
                                                         metastases. An x-ray of the chest will look for pleural effusions, a
                                                         common complication and indicator of more severe disease.
               What is the surgical management          Even if all of the tumor cannot be surgically removed, a thorough
                of this condition?                       debulking procedure should be done. To stage the disease, multiple
                                                         biopsies should be taken of lymph nodes and peritoneal surfaces, even
                                                         if there is no macroscopic disease. A bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy/
                                                         total abdominal hysterectomy with omentectomy and removal of all
                                                         tumor with < 1 cm of visible disease remaining will improve outcome
                                                         and should be performed by an experienced gynecologic oncologist.
               What is the medical management           After cytoreductive surgery, chemotherapy is essential in all but
                of this condition?                       conﬁrmed early stage I disease. The most common combination is
                                                         paclitaxel and a platinum agent.

              346
 CASE 13                    A 22-year-old woman presents to the gynecologist’s ofﬁce complaining of pain with
                             sexual intercourse. She states that the pain began 1 week prior but has continued to
                             worsen. In addition to the dyspareunia, she complains of vaginal itching. She is in a
                             steady relationship, although she does admit to having intercourse with more than one
                             partner in the past month. She does not use condoms but does take an oral contraceptive
                             pill. On physical examination, she is a well-appearing young woman. She is afebrile,
                             with blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg and heart rate of 75/min. She is nontender to
                             palpation throughout her abdomen. On pelvic examination, a mucopurulent discharge
                             is noted. Visualization of the cervix reveals a red, inﬂamed cervix. The cervix is extremely
                             tender when swabbed and when moved on bimanual examination.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Cervicitis. Cervicitis is an infection of the cervix that often presents
                                            with vaginal itching, burning, and/or a mucopurulent discharge. The
                                            infection may also be asymptomatic. Because of the continuous nature
                                            of the female genital tract, there is some overlap between cervicitis and
                                            vulvovaginitis. Cervicitis is distinguished from pelvic inﬂammatory
                                            disease by the lack of systemic symptoms and lack of abdominal or
                                            adnexal tenderness. However, cervical motion tenderness is often
                                            present in both conditions.

 How is the diagnosis made?                The diagnosis is made based on clinical history and clinical
                                            examination ﬁndings. The history and examination ﬁndings that
                                            support a diagnosis of cervicitis include unprotected sexual intercourse
                                            with multiple partners and examination ﬁndings of mucopurulent

                                                                                                                            GYN ECOLOGY
                                            cervical discharge, cervical erythema, and friability of the cervical
                                            os. Microscopic inspection of vaginal discharge to identify bacterial
                                            vaginosis or trichomoniasis, a Pap smear to identify atypical cells (and
                                            possibly human papillomavirus), and culture for Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                            and Chlamydia trachomatis are all appropriate measures.
 What is the etiology of this               Infectious (most common)
  condition?                                   Chlamydia trachomatis
                                               Human papillomavirus (HPV)
                                               Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                               Trichomonas
                                               Herpes simplex virus (HSV)

                                             Noninfectious
                                               Autoimmune diseases
                                               Measles
                                               Neoplasia
                                               Stevens-Johnson syndrome
                                               Trauma (mechanical or chemical)

 What is the most appropriate              Patients should be treated for both gonorrhea and chlamydia since
  treatment for this condition?             coinfection occurs frequently. Sexual partners should be treated as well.
                                            Treatment regimens include:
                                             One of the following for gonorrhea:
                                               Ceftriaxone
                                               Ciproﬂoxacin
                                               Oﬂoxacin
                                               Levoﬂoxacin
                                             Plus one of the following for chlamydia:
                                               Azithromycin
                                               Doxycycline

                                                                                                                    347
               CASE 14                       A 19-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of abdominal
                                              pain. She states that the pain is worse in her lower abdomen. She has had multiple
                                              sexual partners and rarely uses condoms since she is taking an oral contraceptive. She
                                              has noticed increased pain with sexual intercourse over the past few weeks. Her last
                                              menstrual period was 5 days ago. On physical examination, her temperature is 39.0° C
                                              (102.2° F), blood pressure is 110/70 mm Hg, and heart rate is 80/min. Her abdomen
                                              is soft but tender to palpation in the lower quadrants. The pelvic examination reveals a
                                              purulent discharge from the cervical os with cervical motion tenderness. A Gram stain
                                              of the discharge reveals intracellular gram-negative diplococci.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?          Pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID). PID is a polymicrobial sexually
                                                            transmitted ascending infection of the upper genital tract. Neisseria
                                                            gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis are known causative
                                                            pathogens, often with both infections occurring simultaneously.
                                                            Fifteen percent of endocervical infections with gonorrhea or chlamydia
                                                            progress to PID. Other organisms such as Bacteroides species,
                                                            Escherichia coli, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, and Mycoplasma may be
                                                            involved.

               What risk factors are associated             African-American ethnicity.
                with an increased incidence of               Age < 35 years.
                this condition?                              Having a partner with symptomatic chlamydial or gonococcal
                                                               urethritis.
                                                             History of PID.

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                             Multiple sexual partners.
                                                             Nonbarrier contraception.

                                                            Up to 75% of cases present within 1 week of menses.
               What tests and/or procedures                The diagnosis of PID is complicated by the fact that PID represents a
                could be used to conﬁrm the                 spectrum of disease, and many women may have only mild symptoms.
                diagnosis?                                  Empiric treatment is recommended if the patient has an examination
                                                            suggestive of PID (lower abdominal pain, purulent cervical discharge,
                                                            and/or cervical motion tenderness, adnexal or uterine tenderness), the
                                                            patient’s risk factors are consistent with PID, and a pregnancy test is
                                                            negative. A diagnosis of PID may be conﬁrmed by histologic evidence
                                                            of endometritis on biopsy or laparoscopy, demonstration of
                                                            N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis in the genital tract, or imaging studies
                                                            revealing ﬂuid-ﬁlled oviducts. Other noninvasive diagnostic tests that
                                                            may be helpful include laboratory studies looking for evidence of
                                                            inﬂammation (C-reactive protein, CBC, erythrocyte sedimentation
                                                            rate).
               What is the most appropriate                This patient has an examination suggestive of PID; she should
                treatment for this patient?                 therefore be started on therapy. Treatment options include
                                                            intramuscular ceftriaxone followed by doxycycline for 14 days or
                                                            cefoxitin plus probenecid. Patients may require hospitalization if
                                                            a tubo-ovarian abscess is present, they are noncompliant, there are
                                                            signs of systemic infections, or they are unable to take or absorb oral
                                                            antibiotics. Inpatient therapy includes cefoxitin or cefotetan plus
                                                            doxycycline. Clindamycin plus gentamicin is an alternative regimen.
                                                            Sexual partners should be examined and treated as necessary.

              348
 What are the potential                Dyspareunia
  complications associated with this    Ectopic pregnancy
  condition?                            Gonococcal perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome)
                                        Increased risk of infertility
                                        Repeated infection
                                        Tubo-ovarian abscess formation
                                        Chronic pelvic pain

                                                                                                      GYN ECOLOGY

                                                                                                349
               CASE 15                     A 22-year-old nulligravid woman presents to her gynecologist because of irregular,
                                            widely spaced menses. Menarche was at age 14, but she has rarely had regular cycles.
                                            For the past year, she has had only three complete menses, once going 6 months
                                            between periods. She is sexually active and uses condoms for contraception. Upon
                                            physical examination, she has a temperature of 37° C (98.6° F), heart rate of 80/min,
                                            and blood pressure of 140/85 mm Hg. She is 165 cm (5′4″) tall and weighs 83 kg
                                            (190 lb). She is overweight, with acne and a few dark hairs on her upper lip and chin.
                                            Speculum and bimanual examination reveal normal external and internal genitalia
                                            without tenderness or masses.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). Based on the Rotterdam criteria,
                                                          a patient must have any two of the following:
                                                           Oligo and/or anovulation.
                                                           Clinical and/or biochemical signs of hyperandrogenism (hirsutism/
                                                            acne).
                                                           Polycystic ovaries by ultrasound.

               What are other causes of this             Secondary amenorrhea can be due to hormonal or anatomical causes.
                condition?                                Pregnancy is the most common cause, with premature menopause,
                                                          discontinuing hormonal contraception, and hypo- or hyperthyroidism
                                                          as other prevalent causes. Other underlying disorders include
                                                          Asherman’s syndrome, pituitary adenoma, or functional ovarian or
                                                          adrenal tumor. Hypothalamic disturbance due to stress, weight change,
                                                          or systemic disease should also be investigated.

GYN ECOLOGY
               What tests could be used to               A pregnancy test should be done. An ultrasound will look for the “string
                conﬁrm the diagnosis?                     of pearls” sign indicating classic polycystic ovaries and conﬁrm normal
                                                          uterine anatomy. A positive progestin withdrawal test (induced menses
                                                          after 10 days of progestin therapy) will identify anovulatory cycles rather
                                                          than uterine abnormalities or estrogen deﬁciency as the cause of the
                                                          amenorrhea. Levels of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing
                                                          hormone (LH), testosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
                                                          (DHEAS) should be measured. PCOS patients have a high LH/FSH
                                                          ratio and elevated total testosterone. If PCOS is ruled out, prolactin
                                                          and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels should be measured,
                                                          and a dexamethasone stimulation test should be performed to rule out
                                                          hypercortisolism.
               What are the management                   The management of PCOS focuses on treating the hyperandrogenism
                options for this patient?                 and hirsutism, metabolic disturbances, and infertility. Oral
                                                          contraceptive pills are very effective at creating regular cycles and
                                                          halting excess androgen production, although they do nothing to affect
                                                          hair that is already established. Metformin and weight reduction have
                                                          been shown to help insulin resistance and promote normal follicular
                                                          cycles. Clomiphene is used for ovulation induction if fertility is desired.
               What are the potential                    The unopposed estrogen resulting from anovulatory cycles puts
                complications associated with this        patients with PCOS at higher risk for endometrial hyperplasia
                condition?                                and neoplasm. An association has also been noted between PCOS
                                                          and insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and metabolic
                                                          syndrome. Prolonged exposure to high levels of testosterone can lead
                                                          to virilization, with male-pattern baldness, voice deepening, and
                                                          clitoromegaly.

              350
 CASE 16                     A 70-year-old G3P3 woman complains of 2 months of painless intermittent vaginal
                              spotting. She went through menopause at age 52 and was using hormone replacement
                              therapy (HRT) until 3 years ago. Her past medical history is signiﬁcant for type 2
                              diabetes. She is 170 cm (5′6″) tall and weighs 82 kg (180 lb). On physical examination,
                              she is afebrile, with heart rate of 75/min and blood pressure of 135/80 mm Hg. On
                              speculum examination, the external genitalia are normal, while the vaginal walls are
                              dry and atrophic. The cervix has no lesions, and a drop of blood is seen at the os. An
                              intravaginal ultrasound is performed in the ofﬁce, revealing a 7-mm endometrial stripe.
                              A Pap smear and endometrial biopsy are done and results are sent to pathology.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Endometrial hyperplasia. This patient presented with postmenopausal
                                            bleeding, deﬁned as any vaginal bleeding that starts after 12 months
                                            of postmenopausal amenorrhea. The most important consideration
                                            in postmenopausal women presenting with bleeding is to rule out
                                            endometrial carcinoma and its precursor, endometrial hyperplasia. The
                                            thickened stripe seen on ultrasound suggests hyperplasia; the biopsy
                                            specimen will determine if it has malignant potential.

 What conditions should be                 While the uterus is the most likely source of postmenopausal bleeding,
  included in the differential              other locations in the genital tract must be investigated. Atrophic
  diagnosis?                                vaginal mucosa is friable and tends to bleed easily. Cervical carcinoma
                                            must be ruled out with a Pap smear and biopsy if a lesion is seen.
                                            Within the uterus, benign polyps, leiomyomas, or adenomyosis can also
                                            cause bleeding.

                                                                                                                        GYN ECOLOGY
 What risk factors are associated          The risk factors for endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma are the
  with an increased incidence of            same, with the most important being unopposed estrogen. This can
  this condition?                           be endogenous (nulliparity, late menopause) or exogenous (HRT).
                                            Progesterone must be given to any woman with a uterus on estrogen
                                            replacement. Obesity and diabetes are risk factors due to the excess
                                            estrogen produced by adipose tissue. In younger women, polycystic
                                            ovarian syndrome is an important cause of unopposed estrogen, and
                                            any woman on tamoxifen for breast cancer treatment is at higher risk
                                            for hyperplasia. It should be noted that there is a second, rare class of
                                            endometrial cancer that is not hormone dependent; this cancer tends
                                            to be more malignant, has serous or clear-cell histology, and appears in
                                            multiparous women.
 How is this condition classiﬁed?          Endometrial hyperplasia is a histologic diagnosis made from an
                                            endometrial biopsy taken when the endometrial stripe on ultrasound
                                            is ≥ 4–5 mm or if suspicion of cancer is high. Endometrial hyperplasia
                                            is classiﬁed as simple or complex, with or without atypia. Simple
                                            hyperplasia without atypia is benign, while complex hyperplasia with
                                            atypia is considered premalignant.
 What are the management                   If the patient has hyperplasia without atypia, the treatment is a 3-month
  strategies for this condition?            course of cyclic progestin therapy (medroxyprogesterone acetate or
                                            norethindrone acetate) followed by another endometrial biopsy to
                                            ensure resolution. If hyperplasia with atypia or carcinoma is found,
                                            hysterectomy is recommended. Because excess unopposed estrogen
                                            causes hyperplasia, estrogen levels should be determined to rule out an
                                            estrogen-producing ovarian neoplasm.

                                                                                                                 351
               CASE 17                    A 32-year-old woman presents to the city health clinic after she noticed an ulceration
                                           on her vulva. She ﬁrst noticed the lesion about 1 week prior. She has a history of
                                           gonorrhea and is worried that this may be another sexually transmitted infection. She
                                           recently became sexually active with a new partner, and she denies using any form of
                                           protection. She denies any other symptoms. On examination of the external genitalia,
                                           a painless, ulcerated papule is observed in the vestibule of the vagina. The ulcer has a
                                           smooth, clean base with indurated borders. The remainder of the pelvic examination is
                                           unremarkable.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Primary syphilis, the ﬁrst stage of infection by the spirochete
                                                          Treponema pallidum, is characterized by a painless ulcer (also known
                                                          as a chancre) that appears on or near the site of contact 10–60
                                                          days after infection. Often the lesion will go unnoticed and heal
                                                          spontaneously in 1–2 months.

               What conditions should be                 The conditions that should be considered in the differential for the
                included in the differential              chancre observed in primary syphilis include:
                diagnosis?                                 Genital herpes
                                                           Lichen planus
                                                           Lymphogranuloma venereum
                                                           Psoriasis
                                                           Chancroid (Haemophilus ducreyi)

               What tests could be used to                Dark-ﬁeld microscopy: identiﬁes motile spirochetes from primary

GYN ECOLOGY
                conﬁrm the diagnosis?                       and secondary lesions only.
                                                           Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test/rapid plasma
                                                            reagin (RPR): a rapid and cheap test, but with only 60–75%
                                                            sensitivity in primary syphilis. The test becomes negative after
                                                            treatment.
                                                           Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test (FTA-ABS): a
                                                            sensitive and speciﬁc test that remains positive for life. It is used as a
                                                            secondary diagnostic test.
               What is the most appropriate              Intramuscular penicillin is the treatment of choice. In patients who are
                treatment for this condition?             allergic to penicillin, tetracycline or doxycycline may be used. In cases
                                                          of neurosyphilis, intravenous penicillin should be used.
               What is the natural progression of        If left untreated, primary syphilis may progress to secondary syphilis
                this condition if left untreated?         4–8 weeks after the appearance of the chancre.
                                                           Secondary syphilis is characterized by low-grade fever, generalized
                                                             lymphadenopathy, and a maculopapular rash on the palms and soles.
                                                             Condyloma lata (hypertrophic, ﬂat, wartlike lesions) may also be
                                                             observed.
                                                           Secondary syphilis is followed by the early latent phase, which
                                                             encompasses the ﬁrst year of infection. No symptoms are present, but
                                                             serology is positive.
                                                           The late latent phase is characterized by asymptomatic infection < 1
                                                             year during which serologies may be positive or negative. One-third
                                                             of cases will go on to tertiary syphilis.
                                                           Tertiary syphilis occurs 1–20 years after initial infection. It is
                                                             characterized by granulomatous gummas, neurologic ﬁndings (tabes
                                                             dorsalis, Argyll Robertson pupils), and cardiac ﬁndings (aortic root
                                                             aneurysms, aortitis, aortic regurgitation).

              352
 CASE 18                   A 38-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with nausea, vomiting,
                            fever, and chills. A few days prior to the onset of these symptoms, she developed a rash
                            over most of her body that resembles a sunburn. She has no prior medical history. She
                            is currently menstruating and regularly uses “super-absorbent” tampons. She reports
                            that she has not been changing her tampons as frequently since her pharmacy was
                            out of her usual brand. On examination, her temperature is 39.0° C (102.2° F), blood
                            pressure is 90/60 mm Hg, heart rate is 110/min, and oxygen saturation is 96%. She
                            appears visibly ill. A diffuse macular erythematous rash is present over most of her body,
                            and her conjunctivae appear injected. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings include a WBC
                            count of 18,000/mm3, hemoglobin of 11.0 g/dL, and a platelet count of 90,000/mm3.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Toxic shock syndrome (TSS). TSS results from localized infection
                                          of soft tissues with Staphylococcus aureus. Infections may arise from
                                          tumors, abscesses, burns, osteomyelitis, and postsurgical sites. TSS
                                          has been associated with the use of tampons, with higher-absorbency
                                          products leading to greater risk. Contraceptive sponges have also
                                          been associated with TSS. Most cases of TSS occur in women of
                                          childbearing age; however, non-menstrual-related cases have become
                                          almost as common as menstrual-related cases.

 What is the pathogenesis of this        TSS is caused by the preformed Staphylococcus aureus exotoxin
  condition?                              TSST-1. TSST-1 acts as a superantigen that stimulates the production
                                          of interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), leading to
                                          systemic inﬂammation. This causes generalized vasodilation and

                                                                                                                         GYN ECOLOGY
                                          subsequent loss of blood pressure.
 What are the typical laboratory         The abnormal laboratory ﬁndings reﬂect the multisystem involvement
  ﬁndings in this condition?              of TSS and include the following:
                                           CBC: leukocytosis, anemia, thrombocytopenia (< 100,000).
                                           Urinalysis: mild pyuria, elevated BUN and creatinine.
                                           Liver function tests: elevated bilirubin, elevated AST and ALT.
                                           Blood cultures: negative (illness is due to an exotoxin, not invasion of
                                            the organism).
 What are the typical physical           All patients with deﬁnite TSS have fever > 38.9° C (102.0° F),
  ﬁndings in this condition?              hypotension, and skin manifestations. The initial rash is characterized
                                          by a diffuse, red, macular rash resembling a sunburn. Late-onset skin
                                          manifestations include a pruritic maculopapular rash that may occur
                                          1–2 weeks after disease onset and desquamation of the palms and soles
                                          that characteristically begins 1–3 weeks after illness develops. TSS can
                                          involve all other organ systems. Many patients report diffuse myalgias
                                          and weakness as presenting symptoms. Gastrointestinal symptoms are
                                          also common, particularly profuse diarrhea.
 What is the most appropriate            Immediate supportive treatment with ﬂuid replacement is indicated if
  treatment for this condition?           hypotension and shock are present. This also includes oxygen therapy
                                          and placement of a central venous pressure line or a pulmonary
                                          arterial catheter for hemodynamic monitoring. Any potential sources
                                          of infection should be addressed, including removal of tampons or
                                          drainage of abscesses. Systemic antistaphylococcal therapy should
                                          be started with a β-lactamase-resistant penicillin (e.g., nafcillin or
                                          oxacillin) or a cephalosporin.
 What is the prognosis for patients      The mortality rate for TSS is approximately 5%. Most patients will
  with this condition?                    recover in 1–2 weeks. Up to 30% of women with a history of TSS may
                                          have a recurrence.

                                                                                                                  353
               CASE 19                   A 27-year-old woman in her ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy complains of intense vaginal
                                          itching with a profuse greenish discharge. She also notes a foul odor to the discharge.
                                          She states that she is in a monogamous relationship with her boyfriend of 6 months.
                                          They initially used condoms during intercourse, but they have not used any form of
                                          contraception for the past 2 months. On physical examination, the patient is afebrile,
                                          with blood pressure of 125/80 mm Hg and heart rate of 85/min. The pelvic examination
                                          reveals a malodorous, frothy greenish-gray discharge with inﬂammation of the cervix
                                          and vaginal mucosa. Punctate hemorrhages are visible on the cervix. The vaginal pH is
                                          > 4.5, and motile organisms are seen on a wet prep of the vaginal discharge (as seen in
                                          Figure 12-3).

GYN ECOLOGY

                                          F IGU R E 12-3.   (Reproduced, with permission, from Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski S,
                                          Ma OJ, Cline DM. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 6th ed.
                                          New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 108-3.)

               What conditions should be                 Atrophic vaginitis
               included in the differential               Bacterial vaginosis
               diagnosis?                                 Candidiasis
                                                          Chlamydia
                                                          Gonorrhea
                                                          Irritant or allergic vaginitis
                                                          Trichomoniasis

              354
 What is the most likely diagnosis?   Trichomonal vaginitis is a sexually transmitted infection caused by the
                                       ﬂagellated protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis. The incidence of this
                                       infection is approximately 25%. Changes in the cervical and vaginal
                                       epithelium caused by the infection may result in false-positive Pap
                                       smear results. Patients with Trichomonas are twice as likely to develop
                                       HIV as the general population, and other sexually transmitted diseases
                                       such as chlamydia and gonorrhea are frequently found to coexist along
                                       with Trichomonas.
 How is the diagnosis made?           The diagnosis is made by visualizing motile ﬂagellated organisms (as
                                       seen in Figure 12-3) with polymorphonuclear leukocytes on a saline
                                       smear of the vaginal discharge. Evidence of trichomonal infection may
                                       be seen on a Pap smear.
 What risk factors are associated      Intrauterine contraceptive device use.
  with an increased incidence of        Tobacco use.
  this condition?                       Unprotected sex with multiple partners.

 What is the most appropriate         Trichomonal vaginitis is a sexually transmitted infection, therefore the
  treatment for this condition?        partners of infected patients should be tested and treated as appropriate.
                                       A single dose of metronidazole is the treatment of choice.

                                                                                                                    GYN ECOLOGY

                                                                                                            355
               CASE 20                    A 67-year-old woman is being seen by her primary care physician for her annual
                                           checkup. She denies any recent illness but states that she has been having a problem
                                           with very sudden, severe urges to go to the bathroom. If she cannot ﬁnd a restroom
                                           quickly, she sometimes loses control of her bladder. She is becoming more and more
                                           nervous about going out in public. She denies dysuria or stool incontinence. She does
                                           not take any medications. On physical examination, she is comfortable, and her vital
                                           signs are within normal limits. Abdominal examination does not reveal any evidence
                                           of fecal impaction. Neurologically, she has good muscle tone, including the rectal
                                           sphincter. Urinalysis is negative for WBCs, bacteria, and leukocyte esterase.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Urge incontinence. Urinary incontinence, or the involuntary leakage
                                                         of urine, affects 30–50% of women and 17% of men over 60 years
                                                         of age; however, it is frequently underdiagnosed due to patients’
                                                         reluctance to report it to their provider. Urge incontinence is due to
                                                         overactivity of the detrusor muscle or sphincter dysfunction. Etiologies
                                                         include neurological causes (inhibited contractions, central nervous
                                                         system dysfunction) and inﬂammatory conditions (cystitis, stone, or
                                                         tumor).

               How is this condition classiﬁed?         There are a number of different types of incontinence:
                                                          Total: uncontrolled, continuous loss of urine due to ﬁstula or loss of
                                                           sphincter activity.
                                                          Stress: loss precipitated by an increase in intra-abdominal pressure
                                                           (coughing, sneezing) due to pelvic ﬂoor weakness; common in

GYN ECOLOGY
                                                           multiparous women.
                                                          Urge: loss follows a strong, unexpected urge to void.
                                                          Overﬂow: patients have chronic urinary retention, leading to
                                                           chronically distended bladder that leaks urine past the sphincter.
               If no urogenital pathology is            Other causes include increased need to void or functional impairment
                found, what are other possible           preventing continent voiding, more common in the elderly. These
                causes of this condition?                etiologies can be remembered with the mnemonic DIAPPERS:
                                                         Delirium/confused state
                                                         Infection
                                                         Atrophic urethritis/vaginitis
                                                         Pharmaceutical
                                                         Psychiatric causes (i.e., depression)
                                                         Excessive urinary output (i.e., diabetes)
                                                         Restricted mobility
                                                         Stool impaction
               How are the different types of           Patients with total incontinence should undergo a cystogram to identify
                incontinence managed?                    the ﬁstula; surgery will be required. Stress incontinence is initially
                                                         managed medically with Kegel exercises to strengthen the pelvic ﬂoor;
                                                         pessary use may be considered. Surgery may be required to move
                                                         the bladder neck to the appropriate location if medical therapy fails.
                                                         Urge incontinence can be treated with anticholinergic medications or
                                                         tricyclic antidepressants. Finally, overﬂow incontinence is managed
                                                         with intermittent self-catheterization and/or timed voiding; underlying
                                                         diseases should be identiﬁed and treated.

              356
 CASE 21                       A 35-year-old G1P1 woman presents to her gynecologist complaining of vaginal
                                itching, discomfort, and discharge of a white “creamy” consistency. Her last menstrual
                                period was 3 weeks ago, and she does not report any new sexual partners. She uses an
                                intrauterine device (IUD) for contraception. Her temperature is 37.0° C (98.6° F),
                                heart rate is 80/min, and blood pressure is 125/80 mm Hg. Speculum examination
                                reveals erythematous and slightly edematous external genitalia. The vaginal walls are
                                coated with a thick, white discharge, but the cervix appears normal, and the IUD string
                                is visible from the os. A sample is taken, two slides are made, and the pH is determined
                                to be 4.0. The saline-prepared slide shows only epithelial and inﬂammatory cells, while
                                the potassium hydroxide-treated slide shows pseudohyphae and budding yeasts. There
                                was no odor noted upon treatment with potassium hydroxide.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?           Vulvovaginal candidiasis. Classic symptoms include a white, odorless,
                                               “cheesy” discharge and vulval swelling, itching, and discomfort. The
                                               wet mount with budding yeasts and pseudohyphae conﬁrms the
                                               diagnosis.

 What conditions should be                    The two other common causes of vaginitis are bacterial vaginosis and
  included in the differential                 trichomoniasis.
  diagnosis?                                    Bacterial vaginosis is caused by Gardnerella vaginalis and other
                                                  anaerobes that are usually suppressed by the dominance of
                                                  Lactobacillus species. The most common symptom is a discharge
                                                  with an unpleasant, “ﬁshy” odor. The wet mount in G. vaginalis
                                                  infection shows epithelial cells with adherent bacteria (“clue cells”)

                                                                                                                           GYN ECOLOGY
                                                  without the presence of inﬂammatory cells. Preparation with
                                                  potassium hydroxide reveals the characteristic amine odor (the
                                                  “whiff test”).
                                                Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted disease caused by the
                                                  Trichomonas protozoa. The classic presentation is a frothy green
                                                  discharge. Diagnosis is made by visualizing the motile protozoa on
                                                  saline wet mount.
                                               Less common causes of vaginitis include atopic and contact dermatitis.
 What risk factors are associated             Risk factors for vulvovaginal candidiasis include:
  with an increased incidence of                Antibiotic use
  this condition?                               Diabetes mellitus
                                                Immunosuppression (steroids, HIV)
                                                Oral or barrier contraceptive use
                                                Pregnancy

 What is the pathophysiology of               Like Gardnerella, Candida species (most commonly C. albicans)
  this condition?                              are part of the normal vaginal ﬂora. However, when the vaginal pH
                                               changes or normal ﬂora are eradicated by antibiotics, Candida rapidly
                                               replaces normal ﬂora and causes symptoms. It can be “bounced back”
                                               by a partner and cause recurrent infection but is not considered a
                                               sexually transmitted disease.
 What is the most appropriate                 This patient has an uncomplicated infection, so her treatment
  treatment for this patient?                  options include 3–7 days of topical azole treatment or single-dose
                                               oral ﬂuconazole. A complicated infection is one in a diabetic,
                                               immunosuppressed, or pregnant patient, in a patient with a history
                                               of recurrence (≥ 4/year) or severe symptoms, or disease caused by a
                                               Candida species other than C. albicans. Treatment of complicated
                                               infection requires 14 days of a topical azole or 2 days of ﬂuconazole.

                                                                                                                     357
                    N OT E S

GYN ECOLOGY

              358
Pediatrics

Case 1       360

Case 2       362

Case 3       364

Case 4       365

Case 5       366

Case 6       368

Case 7       370

Case 8       371

Case 9       372

Case 10      374

Case 11      376

Case 12      377

Case 13      378

Case 14      380

Case 15      382

Case 16      384

Case 17      385

Case 18      386

Case 19      387

Case 20      388

Case 21      389

Case 22      390

Case 23      391

Case 24      392

Case 25      393

Case 26      394

Case 27      396

Case 28      398

Case 29      399

                   359
               CASE 1                     An 8-month-old girl is brought to the emergency department by her grandmother
                                           for being “too sleepy.” On the day of admission, the grandmother noted that she was
                                           difﬁcult to arouse and had decreased oral intake. On examination, the child has a
                                           temperature of 37.5° C (99.5° F), a heart rate of 140/min, and a respiratory rate of
                                           28/min. She is somnolent but withdraws all four extremities to painful stimuli. Physical
                                           examination is unremarkable except for a 2 × 2-cm hematoma on her right buttock.
                                           Relevant laboratory ﬁndings include a WBC count of 9000/mm3 (85% neutrophils),
                                           hemoglobin of 9.4 g/dL, and platelet count of 355,000/mm3. Lumbar puncture reveals
                                           a WBC count of 4/mm3, RBC count of 264/mm3, glucose of 82 mg/dL, and protein of
                                           41 mg/dL. An x-ray of the chest reveals a fracture of the lateral aspect of the right ﬁrst rib
                                           and a healing fracture of the right clavicle.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Nonaccidental trauma (child abuse). Without a history of trauma
                                                          (including a difﬁcult delivery) or intrinsic bone disease, rib fractures
                                                          in infancy are strongly suggestive of abuse. Examination ﬁndings
                                                          of injuries that are not consistent with the history or age of the
                                                          child, multiple injuries in various stages of healing, injuries that are
                                                          pathognomonic for child abuse (e.g., cigarette burns), or different types
                                                          of coexisting injuries (bruises, burns, fractures) are concerning for
                                                          abuse.

               What conditions should be                  Metabolic or congenital:
                included in the differential                 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
                diagnosis of fracture in a child?            Osteogenesis imperfecta

PE DIATRICS
                                                             Rickets
                                                           Accidental trauma:
                                                             Stress fracture
                                                             Toddler’s fracture (subtle nondisplaced spiral fracture resulting
                                                               from a rotational injury while running or playing)
               What is the next step in the              A complete skeletal survey is indicated in preschool-aged children
                workup of this patient?                   when physical abuse is suspected. Radiographs in a skeletal survey
                                                          should minimally include single anteroposterior (AP) views of each
                                                          extremity and the pelvis, as well as AP and lateral views of the chest and
                                                          skull. These ﬁlms should be repeated in 7–10 days to reveal healing
                                                          fractures not seen on the initial ﬁlms.
               What are the common                       Certain fractures are much more speciﬁc for nonaccidental trauma:
                radiological manifestations of this        Compression fractures of vertebral bodies.
                condition?                                 Fractures at the edges of metaphyses—“bucket-handle” fracture,
                                                            corner fracture.
                                                           Healing fractures of various ages, exuberant callus formation.
                                                           Isolated spiral fracture in infants.
                                                           Rib fractures—often posterior ribs.
                                                           Scapular and sternal fractures.
                                                           Separation of distal epiphyses.

              360
 What additional studies should be    Bone scan (skeletal scintigraphy) is complementary to skeletal
  considered?                           survey.
                                       CT scan of the head should be performed to identify subarachnoid,
                                        subdural, or intraparenchymal injury.
                                       Liver and pancreatic enzyme studies or an abdominal CT scan may
                                        uncover damage to these organs.
                                       MRI of the head can detect small subdural hemorrhages or
                                        parenchymal injury not visualized by CT and to provide better
                                        information than CT regarding age of the hemorrhage.
                                       Ophthalmologic examination can identify retinal hemorrhages.
                                       Urine and stool should be screened for blood if abdominal trauma is
                                        suspected.

                                                                                                               PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                         361
               CASE 2                     A 3-year-old boy with a history of recurrent infections is brought to the emergency
                                           department by his parents for left arm pain. The patient had fallen while climbing
                                           a tree 2 weeks ago and, 2 days prior to admission, had developed fever and left arm
                                           swelling. A radiograph of the left arm reveals an osteolytic lesion with periosteal
                                           reaction, consistent with osteomyelitis of the left ulna. Past medical history is signiﬁcant
                                           for recurrent perianal abscesses since birth and repeated episodes of oral thrush,
                                           lymphadenitis, and bacterial enterocolitis. He was hospitalized at 14 months of age for
                                           osteomyelitis of the left proximal tibia caused by Serratia marcescens that responded
                                           well to antibiotic treatment. Family history is unremarkable, and there is no history of
                                           genetic disease.

               What conditions should be                 Immunodeﬁciency disorders should be considered when patients
                considered in the differential            experience frequent or severe bacterial infections beginning in early
                diagnosis?                                life. The differential includes the following:
                                                           Primary immunodeﬁciencies including functional defects in the
                                                             antibody-mediated system (B cells), the cell-mediated system
                                                             (T cells), the phagocytic system, and the complement system.
                                                           Secondary immunodeﬁciencies including immunosuppressive drugs
                                                             and HIV.

               A nitroblue tetrazolium dye               Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). A positive NBT test suggests
                reduction (NBT) test is positive.         phagocyte dysfunction and is the traditional diagnostic test for CGD
                What is the most likely diagnosis?        (a newer test, dihydrorhodamine 123 [DHR] assay, is more sensitive
                                                          than NBT and can differentiate among the different forms of the

PE DIATRICS
                                                          disease). CGD is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by
                                                          genetic defects in the ability of phagocytes to generate reactive oxygen
                                                          intermediates from molecular oxygen. The genetic mutations result in
                                                          the loss or functional inactivation of one of the components of NADPH
                                                          oxidase, which is used by phagocytes to generate reactive oxidants. For
                                                          the boards: think CGD when you see a positive NBT test.
               What are some of the common                Chorioretinitis.
                clinical manifestations of this            Gingivitis.
                condition?                                 Granulomata are most commonly found in the GI tract.
                                                           Lupus syndromes.
                                                           Recurrent infections such as pneumonia, abscesses (including skin
                                                            and liver), lymphadenitis, osteomyelitis, bacteremia/fungemia, and
                                                            superﬁcial skin infections (cellulitis/impetigo).
               What are the most common                  In general, the organisms that infect patients with CGD are catalase
                offending pathogens in this               producing. Common infecting organisms include the following:
                condition?                                 Aspergillus
                                                           Burkholderia cepacia
                                                           Candida albicans
                                                           Nocardia spp.
                                                           Serratia marcescens
                                                           Staphylococcus species, especially Staphylococcus aureus

               What is the most common                   Approximately 70% of patients with CGD are males who inherit their
                mechanism of inheritance in this          disease as an X-linked recessive trait. The other 30% of patients have
                condition?                                autosomal recessive inheritance.

              362
 What is the most appropriate     Long-term antimicrobial and antifungal prophylaxis, typically with
  treatment for this condition?     trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). Trimethoprim alone
                                    or dicloxacillin may be used if patient is allergic to TMP-SMX.
                                    Itraconazole is the most commonly used antifungal agent.
                                   Immunomodulatory prophylaxis: Interferon-γ has been shown to be
                                    beneﬁcial in infection prevention.
                                   Corticosteroids are beneﬁcial in the treatment of noninfectious
                                    CGD-associated granulomata.
                                   Bone marrow transplant is the only known cure for CGD.

                                                                                                          PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                    363
               CASE 3                     A 2-week-old girl is admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) with
                                           hypovolemic shock and is found to have hyponatremia and hyperkalemia. She was
                                           born full term and was noted to have ambiguous genitalia with hypospadias and a
                                           marked ventral chordee that could have been either a penis or an enlarged clitoris. An
                                           ultrasound on her second day of life revealed a normal uterus and ovaries, as well as
                                           normal kidneys and bladder. Chromosomal analysis showed a 46,XX karyotype. In the
                                           NICU, she is found to have markedly elevated plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels
                                           and low plasma cortisol levels.

               What is the differential diagnosis        Congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
                of virilization in a patient with XX      Gestational hyperandrogenism due to exposure to maternal
                genotype?                                   androgen or synthetic progestational agents.
                                                          SRY translocation—the SRY gene is responsible for initiating male
                                                            sexual differentiation.
                                                          “True hermaphroditism”—when both an ovary and a testicle,
                                                            or ovatestes, are present in an individual; due to 46,XY/46,XX
                                                            mosaicism.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), due to a deﬁciency of
                                                         21-hydroxylase (also known as CYP21A2). CAH is the most common
                                                         cause of female pseudohermaphroditism and the most common
                                                         intersex disorder. Because of an enzyme defect, the adrenal glands
                                                         overproduce testosterone and ACTH and decrease synthesis of cortisol.
                                                         21-Hydroxylase deﬁciency is the most common enzyme defect (95%

PE DIATRICS
                                                         of cases) that causes CAH. Many children are now screened for this
                                                         condition at birth as part of routine neonatal screening.
               What are the most common                 21-Hydroxylase deﬁciency results in several clinical syndromes. Two
                clinical features associated with        of these syndromes, a simple virilizing form (presenting as genital
                this condition?                          ambiguity) and a salt-wasting form, are recognized in neonates and
                                                         very young infants. Salt wasting occurs in 75% of patients with classical
                                                         disease and is evident within the ﬁrst 2 weeks of life, with resultant
                                                         hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and inappropriate sodium wasting (high
                                                         urine sodium despite hyponatremia) due to low serum aldosterone and
                                                         elevated plasma renin activity.
               What laboratory and imaging               Biochemical studies—serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone,
                studies should be done to evaluate          deoxycorticosterone, electrolytes, and glucose.
                the infant with ambiguous                 Chromosomal karyotype.
                genitalia?                                Cystovaginoscopy.
                                                          Genitogram.
                                                          Gonadal inspection and biopsy.
                                                          Pelvic ultrasound.

               What is the most appropriate             Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of treatment for CAH in order
                treatment for this condition?            to suppress abnormal adrenal steroidogenesis. Mineralocorticoid
                                                         replacement (ﬂudrocortisone) may also be needed to maintain
                                                         electrolyte homeostasis.
               What adverse events are associated       Numerous adverse effects have been attributed to glucocorticoids. The
                with treatment?                          major systemic side effects of glucocorticoid therapy are suppression
                                                         of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function (leading to adrenal atrophy
                                                         and loss of cortisol secretory capability) and Cushing’s syndrome. If
                                                         correctly dosed and monitored, adverse effects of replacement therapy
                                                         are typically minimal.

              364
 CASE 4                        A boy at 33 weeks’ gestation is born via spontaneous vaginal delivery. Membranes are
                                ruptured at the time of delivery with clear amniotic ﬂuid. His mother did not seek
                                prenatal care but denies any medical problems during the pregnancy. She denies
                                tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug use. At delivery, the infant is small, and his length
                                and weight are < 25% for gestational age. His head is microcephalic. Ophthalmologic
                                examination reveals chorioretinitis. He is pink, with good respiratory effort. His skin
                                is mildly jaundiced with diffuse raised red/purple lesions and petechiae. His anterior
                                fontanelle is soft but full. His sclerae are mildly icteric. His abdomen appears distended
                                and protuberant, but it is soft and nontender. A ﬁrm liver edge is felt 4 cm below
                                the right costal margin, and the spleen is felt 3 cm below the left costal margin. The
                                remainder of the examination is unremarkable. Laboratory results are signiﬁcant
                                for a hemoglobin of 9 g/dL and a platelet count of 45 × 103/mm3 with an atypical
                                lymphocytosis (10%). Direct serum bilirubin is elevated at 8 mg/100 mL. Three
                                hours after birth, the infant develops generalized tonic-clonic seizures that stop after
                                administration of 20 mg/kg of phenobarbital. Cranial ultrasound reveals periventricular
                                calciﬁcations.

 What conditions should be                    Infections in the newborn infant can be classiﬁed as congenital or
  included in the differential                 perinatal. A congenital infection is an infection seen in the newborn
  diagnosis?                                   infant that was acquired transplacentally. A perinatal infection is
                                               acquired either around the time of delivery or during the ﬁrst week of
                                               extrauterine life. The patient’s physical ﬁndings of jaundice, petechiae,
                                               blueberry mufﬁn spots, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly suggest
                                               congenital infection. The most common congenital infections are

                                                                                                                             PE DIATRICS
                                               the ToRCHeS: Toxoplasmosis, Other (HIV, parvovirus), Rubella,
                                               Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Herpes, and Syphilis.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?           Periventricular calciﬁcations seen on cranial ultrasound, microcephaly,
                                               chorioretinitis, and petechiae suggest CMV infection, the most
                                               common congenital infection.
 What tests could be used to                  The diagnosis of congenital CMV infection is best made by isolating
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                        the virus in urine culture within the ﬁrst 3 weeks of life. PCR can be
                                               used on amniotic ﬂuid, urine, saliva, blood, CSF, and biopsy material
                                               to conﬁrm the diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate                 Gancyclovir is recommended for the treatment of infants with
  treatment for this patient?                  symptomatic congenital CMV infection to reduce progression
                                               of sensorineural hearing loss. The treatment of newborns with
                                               asymptomatic CMV congenital infection currently is not indicated.
 What is the prognosis for this               Mortality can be as high as 20–30% in this fulminant syndrome and
  patient?                                     occurs within a few days or weeks. Long-term morbidity is the rule for
                                               survivors. More than 80% of infants with congenital CMV infection
                                               who are symptomatic at birth will develop late complications that may
                                               include hearing loss, vision impairment, and varying degrees of mental
                                               retardation and delay in psychomotor development.
 If the cranial ultrasound had                Congenital toxoplasmosis causes diffuse intracranial calciﬁcations.
  revealed diffuse calciﬁcations in            Other common ﬁndings in congenital toxoplasmosis infections include
  the brain, what would be the most            chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus, and ring-enhancing lesions on head CT.
  likely diagnosis?

                                                                                                                      365
               CASE 5                       A 7-year-old boy is admitted to the hospital with abdominal pain and weight loss of 4.5
                                             kg (10 lb) over the past 5 months. During this time, his parents have noticed a change
                                             in his bowel habits, from 4–5 stools per week to daily stools that are occasionally mixed
                                             with blood. The abdominal pain is intermittent and cramping. On examination, he
                                             is thin, tired, and pale. His heart and lung examinations are normal. His abdomen is
                                             soft, with mild tenderness to palpation in the right lower quadrant. Rectal examination
                                             reveals an anal skin tag and guiaic-positive stool. Laboratory ﬁndings are signiﬁcant for
                                             hemoglobin of 7.3 g/dL and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 77 mm/hr.

               What additional studies should              Abdominal plain ﬁlm or CT scan.
                be considered in the workup of              C-reactive protein.
                this patient?                               Celiac disease testing (e.g., anti-endomysial antibody titer).
                                                            Colonoscopy.
                                                            Liver function tests including albumin, PT, and PTT.
                                                            Stool culture and test for C. difﬁcile toxins A and B.
                                                            Upper endoscopy.
                                                            Upper gastrointestinal barium study with small bowel follow-through.

               Colonoscopy reveals linear                 The radiologic ﬁndings combined with the presence of bloody stool,
                ulcerations and luminal edema in           history of abdominal pain and weight loss, anemia, and elevated ESR
                the descending colon. What is the          are strongly suggestive of Crohn’s disease.
                most likely diagnosis?
               What are the typical pathologic             An abrupt transition between ulcerated and adjacent normal mucosa
                ﬁndings of this condition?                    (“skip lesions”).

PE DIATRICS
                                                            Chronic mucosal damage is the hallmark of inﬂammatory bowel
                                                              disease.
                                                            Crypt abscesses and ulceration.
                                                            Mucosal inﬂammation.
                                                            Noncaseating granulomas.
                                                            Stricture formation.
                                                            Transmural inﬂammation affecting all layers.

               What are the typical upper and              Crohn’s disease may involve any part of the gastrointestinal tract,
                lower endoscopy ﬁndings in this              from the mouth to the anus. Involvement of the small intestine alone
                condition?                                   occurs in about 40% of cases, small intestine and colon in 30%, and
                                                             the colon alone in about 30%.
                                                            Focal mucosal ulcers resembling canker sores (aphthous ulcers),
                                                             edema, and loss of the normal mucosal texture are commonly seen
                                                             early in disease.
                                                            Serosal extension of mesenteric fat (creeping fat).
                                                            Narrowed lumen; in the small intestine this is evidenced on upper
                                                             GI barium study as the “string sign.”

              366
 What are some extraintestinal        Arthritis—peripheral (knees, ankles, hips, wrists, elbows) or axial
  manifestations of this condition?     (sacroiliitis, ankylosing spondylitis).
                                       Erythema nodosum.
                                       Hepatic primary sclerosing cholangitis.
                                       Renal stones.
                                       Uveitis, nonspeciﬁc mild hepatic pericholangitis, and renal disorders
                                        secondary to trapping of the ureters in the inﬂammatory process
                                        sometimes develop.
 What is the most appropriate         5-Aminosalicylates—sulfasalazine, mesalamine.
  treatment for this condition?        Antibiotics—metronidazole.
                                       Corticosteroids.
                                       Immunomodulators—tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), inﬂiximab
                                        (anti–TNF-α immunoglobulin G antibody).
                                       Bowel resection for severe cases.

                                                                                                                    PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                              367
               CASE 6                     A 26-year-old woman gives birth to her ﬁrst child at the local hospital. The mother’s
                                           pregnancy was uncomplicated, but the delivery was complicated by breech
                                           presentation. On successful delivery of a female infant, the pediatrician performed a full
                                           newborn examination. Apgar scores were 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. All
                                           appropriate reﬂexes were present, and examination of the head, back, heart, lungs, and
                                           abdomen was normal. On examination of the hips, ﬂexion and adduction of the hips
                                           produces an audible “clunk” and dislocation of the right hip. On ﬂexion and abduction,
                                           the right hip relocates in the acetabulum.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH). This is the diagnosis
                                                          given to patients born with dislocation or instability of the hip and/
                                                          or with abnormal growth of the hip. Many cases can be detected by
                                                          the newborn hip exam, notably with the Barlow maneuver (ﬂexion,
                                                          adduction, and pressure directed backward on the knees causes
                                                          dislocation) and the Ortolani maneuver (ﬂexion and abduction
                                                          or pressure directed outward on the knees causes relocation).
                                                          Ultrasonography of the hips is currently the most sensitive method of
                                                          detection in infants < 4 months of age. If the diagnosis is not made
                                                          as a newborn, patients are often identiﬁed in the 3- to 6-month-old
                                                          age group, when they will often present for a “well baby” visit with
                                                          Allis’s (Galeazzi’s) sign (chronic hip dislocation leads to a leg length
                                                          discrepancy detectable when the patient lies supine with knees ﬂexed).
                                                          DDH occurs in about 1.5% of newborns and is 4–8 times more
                                                          common in females than males.

PE DIATRICS
               What is the pathogenesis of this          DDH occurs when there is a disruption of the normal relationship
                condition?                                of the femoral head and the acetabulum. Without adequate contact,
                                                          neither can develop normally, leading to an abnormally small femoral
                                                          head and a shallow acetabulum. At birth, the acetabulum has a small
                                                          bony component and a larger cartilaginous component. Because of
                                                          this, the acetabulum is susceptible to remodeling during the ﬁrst
                                                          6 weeks postnatally, making early diagnosis and treatment important
                                                          to improving prognosis.
               What risk factors are associated           Breech presentation.
                with an increased incidence of             Familial history of DDH.
                this condition?                            Female sex.
                                                           First pregnancy.
                                                           High birth weight.
                                                           Multiple gestation.
                                                           Oligohydramnios.
                                                           Other postural or nonpostural deformities (e.g., clubfoot, congenital
                                                            torticollis).

              368
 What is the most appropriate    Management of this condition is largely determined by the age of
  treatment for this condition?   the patient at diagnosis. The goals of treatment should be to establish
                                  and maintain a concentric reduction of the femoral head in the
                                  acetabulum; this will provide the necessary environment for full
                                  development of the femoral head and acetabulum. Children < 6
                                  months old are best treated by a Pavlik harness (Figure 13-1). Children
                                  > 6 months old typically require open or closed reduction and a spica
                                  cast, with open reduction favored in those children > 2 years old. In
                                  patients > 3 years of age, open reduction, femoral shortening, and/
                                  or acetabular osteotomy may be required to maintain a concentric
                                  reduction of the hip joint.

                                                                                                                  PE DIATRICS

                                  FIGURE 13-1.       Pavlik harness. (Reproduced, with permission, from Skin-
                                  ner HB. Current Diagnosis & Treatment in Orthopedics, 3rd ed. New York:
                                  McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 11-5.)

                                                                                                            369
               CASE 7                     A previously healthy 3-year-old boy presents to the emergency department with fever,
                                           stridor, and hoarseness. His mother reports that he has had a runny nose and mild
                                           cough for the past week. Overnight, she noted his cough had worsened and sounded
                                           “barking.” On examination, he has a temperature of 38.2° C (100.8° F), heart rate of
                                           95/min, respiratory rate of 20/min, and pulse oximetry of 97% on room air. Pulmonary
                                           exam is signiﬁcant for tachypnea and inspiratory stridor; mild retractions and nasal
                                           ﬂaring are noted. Cardiac exam is unremarkable. Anteroposterior x-ray of the neck
                                           demonstrates subglottic narrowing consistent with a “steeple sign.”

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Laryngotracheobronchitis, or croup. This is a viral disease of the larynx
                                                         commonly seen in patients aged 3 months to 3 years. It is a clinical
                                                         diagnosis based on fever, stridor, and the characteristic barking cough;
                                                         the “steeple sign” on x-ray supports the diagnosis but is neither sensitive
                                                         nor speciﬁc. It is important to rule out other rare but signiﬁcant causes
                                                         of acute upper airway obstruction, such as epiglottitis or soft tissue
                                                         infection.

               What is the differential diagnosis        Laryngomalacia/tracheomalacia.
                for stridor?                              Vocal cord paralysis.
                                                          Infectious or spasmodic croup.
                                                          Epiglottitis.
                                                          Tracheitis.
                                                          Tonsillitis/peritonsillar abscess/retropharyngeal abscess.
                                                          Foreign body.

PE DIATRICS
               What are the common pathogens            Parainﬂuenza virus types 1, 2, and 3 are the most common pathogens.
                associated with this condition?          Other possibilities include inﬂuenza, respiratory syncytial virus, and
                                                         adenovirus. Bacterial superinfection may result in tracheitis.
               What is the most appropriate             Croup is treated based on its clinical severity. Mild cases are discharged
                treatment for this condition?            on outpatient mist therapy. More severe cases are distinguished by
                                                         stridor at rest, respiratory distress, hypoxemia, cyanosis, pallor, altered
                                                         mental status, or high fever. These patients are often admitted for
                                                         nebulized racemic epinephrine and oral/IM corticosteroids.
               What is the presentation of              Patients with epiglottitis have the sudden onset (within 4–12
                epiglottitis?                            hours) of a high fever, mufﬂed “hot potato” voice, dysphagia, and
                                                         drooling. They adopt the “tripod position,” leaning forward with a
                                                         hyperextended neck and their mouth open. Severe respiratory distress
                                                         develops within minutes to hours, and these patients must undergo
                                                         emergent intubation or tracheostomy. The incidence of epiglottitis has
                                                         substantially decreased with the introduction of the HIB (Haemophilus
                                                         inﬂuenzae type B) vaccine.

              370
 CASE 8                     A mother brings her three children to their pediatrician’s ofﬁce for checkups. While in
                             the waiting room, the oldest child hops around the room and then begins to play with
                             blocks. She speaks clearly and can count 10 blocks. When another child comes over,
                             they build a block tower together. The middle child is using the furniture for support
                             as he explores the waiting room. He sees a red crayon and picks it up using his thumb
                             and foreﬁnger. He then waves bye-bye to a child who is leaving the ofﬁce. The youngest
                             child sits on her mother’s lap and holds a toy. She babbles while her mother reads to
                             her. When one of her siblings comes over, she smiles at them. When a nurse says hello,
                             she does not smile immediately but she takes a toy from her. All three children are
                             healthy and have no developmental issues.

 What is the most likely age range        Between 4 and 5 years. This child is speaking clearly so that strangers
  of the oldest child?                     understand her, is hopping around the room, and is able to engage
                                           in cooperative play. She is also able to count to 10. It is likely that she
                                           is also able to throw a ball overhead, copy basic shapes, and correctly
                                           name some colors. Over the next year, she will likely begin to print
                                           some letters, dress herself, and use a fork and spoon.

 What is the most likely age of the       Approximately 12 months. This child is able to cruise (walk while
  middle child?                            holding onto furniture) and uses a pincer grasp to pick up a crayon. In
                                           the next 6 months, he will likely begin to say a few words, walk without
                                           help, identify pictures in a book, and follow simple one-step directions.
 What is the most likely age of the       Six months. This child is babbling, knows familiar faces, has some
  youngest child?                          stranger anxiety, and reaches for and grasps objects. She can also

                                                                                                                         PE DIATRICS
                                           probably sit by herself, help hold the bottle during feeding, and move
                                           toys from one hand to another. Over the next 6 months, she will likely
                                           begin to crawl, drink from a cup, feed herself ﬁnger food, and say her
                                           ﬁrst word.
 Assuming the youngest child is           Assuming she is up to date with all her previous vaccinations, she
  6 months old, which vaccinations         will probably be getting her third dose of DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus,
  will she be receiving during this        and pertussis), HiB (Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type B), rotavirus, and
  visit?                                   conjugate pneumococcal vaccine. She may also receive her third dose
                                           of hepatitis B vaccine and polio vaccine, which can be given any time
                                           from 6 to 18 months of age.
 The middle child is noted to have        Yes, he should still receive his vaccinations despite having a mild
  a runny nose and a low-grade             illness. Contraindications to getting vaccinations include:
  fever 37.6° C (99.6° F) during this       A moderate or severe illness.
  visit. Should he still receive his        A severe allergy to a component of the vaccine.
  vaccinations?                             Anaphylactic egg allergy for inﬂuenza vaccine.
                                            Encephalopathy within 7 days of prior pertussis vaccination.
                                            Live vaccines in immunocompromised and pregnant patients.
                                            Recent administration of immunoglobulin (for live injected vaccines,
                                              i.e., varicella and measles, mumps, and rubella [MMR]).

                                                                                                                   371
               CASE 9                    A 2-week-old girl is brought to the clinic for her ﬁrst checkup. She was born full term
                                          to a 37-year-old G6P3 mother who received no prenatal care and delivered the infant
                                          at home. Weight and height are both under the 5th percentile. She is dysmorphic, with
                                          upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, epicanthal folds, small ears, and a protruding tongue.
                                          Physical examination is signiﬁcant for a 3/6 harsh holosystolic murmur best heard at the
                                          left mid- to lower sternal border and generalized hypotonia. Her extremities are warm
                                          and well perfused. She has a transverse palmar crease on both hands.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Down syndrome. The dysmorphic features of upslanting palpebral
                                                         ﬁssures, epicanthal folds, and transverse palmar (simian) creases are
                                                         highly suggestive of trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). Frequency increases
                                                         with advanced maternal age. In mothers < 25 years of age, the risk is
                                                         1 in 2000 births and climbs to 1 in 20 births for mothers over age 40
                                                         years.

               What are the methods of                  Down syndrome is caused by trisomy 21, the most common autosomal
                inheritance for this condition?          trisomy in newborns. There are three types of cytogenic abnormalities
                                                         that result in Down syndrome:
                                                          Trisomy 21: The additional copy of chromosome 21 usually results
                                                            from nondisjunction, an error in meiosis. This genotype occurs in
                                                            94% of children with Down syndrome.
                                                          Robertsonian translocation involving chromosome 21: The entire
                                                            long arm of chromosome 21 is translocated to the long arm of an
                                                            acrocentric chromosome. This accounts for 3–4% of cases.

PE DIATRICS
                                                          Trisomy 21 mosaicism: There are two populations of cell types: a
                                                            normal cell line and a second cell line with trisomy 21. This occurs
                                                            in 2–3% of cases.
               What is the most likely                  Approximately 50% of individuals with Down syndrome have
                explanation of the heart murmur?         congenital heart disease. The harsh holosystolic murmur is most likely
                                                         caused by a small ventricular septal defect. The most common heart
                                                         lesions in these patients are:
                                                          Atrioventricular septal defect—45%.
                                                          Ventricular septal defect—35%.
                                                          Isolated secundum atrial septal defect—8%.
                                                          Isolated patent ductus arteriosus—7%.
                                                          Isolated tetralogy of Fallot—4%.
                                                          Other—1%.

               What are other common clinical            Atlanto-axial instability (C1–C2).
                ﬁndings seen in children with this        Endocrine—thyroid disorders, diabetes.
                condition?                                GI abnormalities—duodenal atresia/stenosis, celiac disease.
                                                          Growth—short stature.
                                                          Hearing loss.
                                                          Hematologic disorders (especially leukemias).
                                                          Mental retardation, behavior disorders.
                                                          Ophthalmologic—refractive errors, strabismus, nystagmus.

              372
 What is the prognosis and life       Life expectancy in Down syndrome is shorter than that in the general
  expectancy for patients with this    population. Patients with Down syndrome are more likely to die from
  condition?                           congenital heart defects, dementia, hypothyroidism, or leukemia than
                                       the general population. Adults with Down syndrome usually develop
                                       neuropathic and functional changes typical of Alzheimer’s disease by
                                       their ﬁfth decade.
 What are features of the other two    Trisomy 18 (Edwards’ syndrome): Severe mental retardation, rocker-
  common trisomies?                      bottom feet, low-set ears, micrognathia, clenched hands, horseshoe
                                         kidneys.
                                        Trisomy 13 (Patau’s syndrome): Severe mental retardation,
                                         microphthalmia, microcephaly, cleft lip/palate, polydactyly.

                                                                                                               PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                         373
               CASE 10                    A 10-hour-old boy is admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit because of abdominal
                                           distention. The infant was born full term weighing 3 kg (6.6 lb) to a G1P1 mother
                                           by spontaneous vaginal delivery. There was no fetal distress. The pregnancy was
                                           complicated by polyhydramnios. Physical examination after birth revealed upper
                                           abdominal fullness. The infant was doing well without any respiratory distress. An x-ray
                                           of the abdomen is shown in Figure 13-2.

PE DIATRICS                                FIGURE 13-2.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar
                                           TR, Dunn DL, Hunter JG, Matthews JB, Pollock RE, Schwartz SI. Schwartz’s Principles of Sur-
                                           gery, 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 38-13.)

               What is the differential diagnosis         Duodenal atresia
                of a newborn presenting with               Hirschsprung’s disease
                abdominal distention and                   Malrotation with volvulus
                vomiting?                                  Meconium ileus

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Duodenal atresia. The history of polyhydramnios, a distended
                                                          abdomen, and the “double bubble” sign on abdominal x-ray is most
                                                          suggestive of intestinal obstruction caused by duodenal atresia. It is
                                                          thought to be caused by complete or partial failure of the duodenal
                                                          lumen to recanalize during gestational weeks 8–10. In Figure 13-2, the
                                                          numbers 1 and 2 refer to the double bubbles.
               What is the typical presentation of       Infants with duodenal atresia typically have gastric distention and
                patients with this condition?             vomiting that may be bilious. Bilious vomiting may begin hours after
                                                          ﬁrst feeding.

              374
 How is the diagnosis of this        Although most infants with bowel obstruction present in the early
  condition made prenatally?          postnatal period, intestinal atresias often are detected by prenatal
                                      ultrasound examination. Proximal atresias are more likely than distal
                                      lesions to be detected prenatally. Distal lesions usually are detected
                                      after birth. Ultrasound ﬁndings that suggest intestinal atresia include
                                      polyhydramnios, a dilated loop of bowel, hyperechoic bowel, and
                                      ascites. On prenatal ultrasound, duodenal atresia usually has the
                                      characteristic “double bubble” appearance that is seen on a postnatal
                                      abdominal radiograph.
 What other abnormalities can be     Duodenal atresia is an isolated ﬁnding in one-third to one-half of cases.
  associated with this condition?     However, it is often associated with other malformations, including
                                      gastrointestinal (biliary atresia, agenesis of the gallbladder), cardiac,
                                      renal, and vertebral anomalies. Approximately 24–28% of newborns
                                      with duodenal atresia or stenosis have Down syndrome.
 What is the appropriate treatment   Treatment consists of initial preoperative management followed by
  for this condition?                 surgical correction. Initially, patients should have feedings withheld
                                      and a nasogastric or orogastric tube placed to suction. Abnormalities
                                      in ﬂuid and electrolyte balance should be corrected. Broad-spectrum
                                      antibiotics may be used to prevent postoperative infection.

                                                                                                                  PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                           375
               CASE 11                    A 1-month-old Caucasian girl is sent to the emergency room by her pediatrician for
                                           failure to thrive. She was born at full term, weighing 2.72 kg (6 lb), via spontaneous
                                           vaginal delivery with no complications. She was discharged to home with her mother
                                           and has been feeding well; she takes 3–4 ounces of formula every 2–3 hours. Her
                                           parents deny any emesis, fevers, or diarrhea, although her mother notes frequent foul-
                                           smelling loose stools. Family history is unremarkable. She lives with her parents and
                                           four siblings. She is afebrile with normal vital signs. Her weight is 3.3 kg (7.3 lb) (< 5th
                                           percentile), length is 50 cm (19.7 in) (< 5th percentile), and head circumference is 37
                                           cm (14.6 in) (at 10th percentile). She is cachectic but interactive. The remainder of her
                                           examination is unremarkable.

               What is the deﬁnition of failure to       The term FTT may be attributed to a child who meets any of the
                thrive (FTT)?                             following criteria:
                                                           Has weight < 5th percentile for age and sex.
                                                           Has depressed weight for height.
                                                           Has a rate of weight gain that causes a decrease across two or more
                                                            major percentile lines over time.
                                                           Has a rate of daily weight gain less than expected for age.

               What are the two types of FTT?            Organic and nonorganic. Organic causes of FTT include:
                                                           Abnormal loss of calories.
                                                           Increased metabolic requirements.
                                                           Failure to ingest an appropriate number of calories.
                                                           Failure to metabolize.

PE DIATRICS
                                                          Most cases of FTT are due to nonorganic causes, typically psychosocial
                                                          factors.
               What organic causes of FTT                 Cystic ﬁbrosis.
                should be considered in a patient          Gastroesophageal reﬂux.
                < 6 months old?                            HIV infection.
                                                           Inborn errors of metabolism.
                                                           Milk-protein intolerance.
                                                           Perinatal or postnatal infections.
                                                           Renal tubular acidosis.

               While in the hospital the patient         Malabsorption must be considered when a patient fails to gain weight
                feeds well, but despite adequate          despite feeding well. Initial screening studies for malabsorption
                caloric intake, she fails to gain         include:
                weight. What tests should be               Serum electrolytes, albumin, and total protein.
                included in the initial workup of          Stool exam for Clostridium difﬁcile, ova and parasites, and stool
                this patient’s case of FTT?                 cultures for bacterial pathogens.
                                                           Stool exam for occult blood, leukocytes, reducing substances, and
                                                            pH.
                                                           Sweat chloride test.
                                                           Urinalysis and culture.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        In a Caucasian patient with a history of FTT, malabsorption, and foul-
                                                          smelling stools, cystic ﬁbrosis must be considered. In addition to the
                                                          sweat chloride test, many states now screen for cystic ﬁbrosis at birth.
               What is the most appropriate              The mainstay of treatment for pancreatic insufﬁciency in cystic ﬁbrosis
                treatment for malabsorption?              is pancreatic enzyme replacement. In addition, patients should receive
                                                          supplementation of fat-soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E, and K).

              376
 CASE 12                    A 2-year-old previously healthy girl is brought to the emergency department (ED) after
                             a seizure. She had been watching television when she developed full-body stiffening,
                             followed by convulsions and twitching of all four extremities. According to her parents,
                             the seizure lasted approximately 5 minutes and was followed by a brief postictal period
                             of drowsiness. She had had a runny nose for 1 day, which her mother attributed to sick
                             contacts at day care. On examination, she has a temperature of 39.9° C (103.8° F),
                             heart rate of 140/min, respiratory rate of 22/min, blood pressure of 95/75 mm Hg, and
                             pulse oximetry of 99% on room air. She is well appearing and in no acute distress. She
                             has moist mucous membranes with rhinorrhea. Lung examination is signiﬁcant for
                             decreased breath sounds at the base of the right lung. The remainder of her physical
                             examination is unremarkable.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Simple febrile seizure in the context of pneumonia. Febrile seizures
                                            occur in 2–5% of children aged 6 months to 5 years. Simple febrile
                                            seizures are the most common type of febrile seizure and are
                                            characterized by seizures that last < 15 minutes and have no focal
                                            features, and if they occur in a series, the total duration is < 30
                                            minutes.

 What should be included in the            During the acute evaluation, a physician’s most important
  workup of a seizure in a child with       responsibility is to determine the cause of the fever and to rule out
  a fever?                                  meningitis. Laboratory tests may include:
                                             Lumbar puncture (especially if < 1 year old).
                                             Electrolytes and glucose.

                                                                                                                          PE DIATRICS
                                             Complete blood count.
                                             Toxicology screen.

 What is the recommended                   A patient with a simple febrile seizure does not need anticonvulsant
  treatment and prognosis for this          therapy. Treatment should be directed at the underlying cause of the
  patient?                                  fever. Children with a previous simple febrile seizure are at increased
                                            risk of recurrent febrile seizures; this occurs in approximately one-third
                                            of cases. Children who have simple febrile seizures are also at slightly
                                            increased risk for epilepsy. The prevalence of epilepsy by age 25 years
                                            is approximately 2.4%, which is about twice the risk in the general
                                            population.
 Five hours later the same patient         Complex febrile seizure. These are characterized by a seizure lasting
  presents to the ED after having a         over 15 minutes, recurring within 24 hours of a previous febrile
  generalized tonic-clonic seizure          seizure, or showing signs of focality.
  for 25 minutes. Her temperature
  is 40.1° C (104.1° F). What is the
  most likely diagnosis?
 What should now be included in             Electroencephalography (EEG).
  the workup of this patient?                MRI or CT of the head may be warranted.

 What are some treatment options            Phenobarbital—daily administration may be considered in patients
  for recurrent febrile seizures?             with recurrent or complex febrile seizures and for patients at
                                              high risk of developing epilepsy (e.g., those with cerebral palsy, a
                                              structural brain lesion, febrile status epilepticus, or a very abnormal
                                              EEG).
                                             Rectal diazepam—administered for seizures lasting longer than 5–10
                                              minutes.

                                                                                                                    377
               CASE 13                    A 5-year-old girl is brought to her pediatrician with a rash on her legs, abdominal
                                           pain, and arthralgias. Two weeks ago, the patient had an upper respiratory infection.
                                           Three days prior to this visit, the patient complained of abdominal pain and was
                                           taken to a local emergency department. Abdominal radiograph and obstruction series
                                           were normal and the patient was sent home. The morning of admission, her mother
                                           noticed “red bumps” on both of the patient’s legs. The patient had no history of fever,
                                           diarrhea, or bloody stools. Her temperature is 37.5° C (99.5° F), heart rate is 115/min,
                                           respiratory rate is 22/min, and blood pressure is 95/70 mm Hg. Physical examination is
                                           signiﬁcant for 2–5-mm erythematous, nonblanching papules on the lower extremities
                                           as well as a slightly swollen and tender right knee. The remainder of the examination is
                                           unremarkable. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                           WBC count: 11,000/mm3
                                           Hemoglobin: 9.4 g/dL
                                           Platelet count: 465,000/mm3
                                           Prothrombin time (PT): 12 s
                                           Partial thromboplastin time (PTT): 20 s
                                           Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 20 mm/hr
                                           Electrolytes: normal
                                           Urinalysis: moderate blood

               What conditions should be                 Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) is the most likely diagnosis given
                included in the differential               the triad of a purpuric rash on the lower extremities, abdominal pain,
                diagnosis?                                 and arthralgias.
                                                          Clotting disorders are less likely given the normal PT and PTT.

PE DIATRICS
                                                          Infection including Neisseria meningitidis and sepsis is less likely in a
                                                           well-appearing afebrile patient.
                                                          Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), leukemia, and
                                                           hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) should be considered in a
                                                           patient with abdominal pain and purpura; however, her acute
                                                           symptoms and her normal CBC make these less likely.
                                                          Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) should be considered with a
                                                           presentation of rash and a swollen joint; however, the purpuric rash
                                                           and the timing of the symptoms are not consistent with JRA.
                                                          Systemic autoimmune diseases should be considered, including
                                                           hypersensitivity vasculitis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

               What is the pathogenesis of this         HSP is a systemic small-vessel vasculitis characterized by the tissue
                condition?                               deposition of immunoglobulin A (IgA)-containing immune complexes.
                                                         The pathogenesis is similar to that of IgA nephropathy, which is
                                                         associated with identical histological ﬁndings in the kidney. The
                                                         exact cause is unknown, but many cases follow an upper respiratory
                                                         infection, suggesting that the precipitating antigen may be infectious.
               What are the clinical                    Diffuse inﬂammation of the small vessels causes abdominal pain,
                manifestations of this condition?        arthritis, and palpable purpura. Renal involvement occurs in 50% of
                                                         patients, manifested by hematuria, proteinuria, and cellular casts on
                                                         urinalysis. The hallmark of this disorder on physical examination is
                                                         a symmetric pattern of purpura, primarily involving the buttocks and
                                                         lower extremities as well as sites of pressure (e.g., areas of sock or pants
                                                         elastic).

              378
 How is this condition diagnosed?   The diagnosis of HSP is made clinically. The characteristic tetrad of
                                     (1) rash, (2) arthralgias, (3) abdominal pain, and (4) renal disease is
                                     virtually pathognomonic of HSP in children. Microscopically, tissue
                                     deposition of IgA may be seen in the skin or kidney.
 What is the most appropriate       HSP is a self-limited disorder and usually resolves in 1–6 weeks.
  treatment for this condition?      Complete recovery occurs in approximately 94% of patients. Treatment
                                     is primarily supportive; however, corticosteroids may be used in more
                                     severe disease.

                                                                                                                 PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                           379
               CASE 14                      A 4-month-old girl with a history of chronic constipation and failure to thrive is brought
                                             to the emergency department with a 2-day history of fever to 39.1° C (102.3° F), bilious
                                             vomiting, and decreased oral intake. Her parents deny any change in her bowel habits
                                             from her usual 1–2 stools per week. Her only medication is docusate sodium for chronic
                                             constipation since 2 months of age. On examination, she has a temperature of 38.6° C
                                             (101.4° F), heart rate of 144/min, and blood pressure of 95/63 mm Hg. Her height,
                                             weight, and head circumference are all below the 5th percentile. Physical examination
                                             is signiﬁcant for a thin and tired-appearing infant. Her abdomen is soft and distended
                                             with distant bowel sounds. There is palpable stool in the lower left quadrant. Rectal
                                             examination is signiﬁcant for a small ampulla that is empty of stool. A radiograph of the
                                             abdomen is performed and shows dilated loops of bowel with an absence of rectal air.

               What is the differential diagnosis          The major causes of constipation can be broadly categorized as either
                of chronic constipation in                  functional or organic. Functional constipation is deﬁned as persistent,
                children?                                   difﬁcult, infrequent, or incomplete defecation without evidence of a
                                                            structural or biochemical cause. Causes of organic constipation make
                                                            up < 5% of cases and include:
                                                             Anatomic malformations (e.g., anal stenosis, imperforate anus).
                                                             Certain drugs such as antacids (containing aluminum or calcium),
                                                               opiates, and phenobarbital.
                                                             Metabolic and GI causes such as hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia,
                                                               cystic ﬁbrosis, diabetes mellitus; neuropathic conditions (e.g.,
                                                               spinal cord abnormalities, tethered cord, neuroﬁbromatosis, static
                                                               encephalopathy).

PE DIATRICS
                                                             Nerve and muscle disorders (e.g., Hirschsprung disease, prune-belly
                                                               syndrome, Down syndrome).
                                                             Other disorders such as cow’s milk protein intolerance and infant
                                                               botulism.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?          The patient’s history of chronic constipation and failure to thrive, her
                                                            empty rectal ampulla, and the radiographic ﬁndings are suggestive of
                                                            Hirschsprung disease.
               What is the pathophysiology of              Hirschsprung disease is believed to result from failure of the ganglion
                this condition?                             cell precursors to migrate along the gastrointestinal tract in a
                                                            craniocaudal direction during weeks 5–12 of gestation. Incomplete
                                                            parasympathetic innervation in the aganglionic segment results
                                                            in abnormal peristalsis, constipation, and a functional intestinal
                                                            obstruction. It occurs in 1 in 5000 live births and often presents with
                                                            delayed passage of meconium. The disease is four times more common
                                                            in boys than in girls, and 10–15% of patients have Down syndrome.
               What are the next steps in                   Rectal biopsy is considered the gold standard. The absence of
                diagnosis?                                    ganglion cells in the submucosa (Meissner’s plexus) and myenteric
                                                              level (Auerbach’s plexus) is diagnostic.
                                                             Unprepped barium enema—diagnostic ﬁndings include a cone-
                                                              shaped transition zone or caliber change.
                                                             Anorectal manometry (balloon distention of the rectum)—
                                                              demonstrating a lack of relaxation of the internal anal sphincter is
                                                              suggestive of Hirschsprung disease.

              380
 What are some of the major          Obstruction: Patients often present with bilious emesis, abdominal
  complications of this condition?     distention, and failure to pass stool.
                                      Enterocolitis: Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis (HAEC) is the
                                       most severe and potentially lethal complication. Patients usually
                                       present with explosive, foul-smelling diarrhea, fever, vomiting, and
                                       abdominal pain and distention. It results from ulceration and erosion
                                       of the mucosa proximal to the involved segment. The affected area
                                       is then invaded by colonic organisms and can lead to intestinal
                                       perforation, peritonitis, sepsis, shock, and death.
                                      Volvulus: A rare complication of Hirschsprung disease.

 What is the most appropriate       Surgery is the mainstay of treatment. The goal is to resect the affected
  treatment for this condition?      segment and anastomose the normal bowel to the anus, preserving
                                     sphincter function. It is usually performed in two stages: patients
                                     initially undergo a diverting colostomy (to allow the normal dilated
                                     bowel to decompress) followed by deﬁnitive repair 3–12 months later
                                     depending on the age of the patient and severity of disease.

                                                                                                                PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                          381
               CASE 15                    An 8-month-old boy with no signiﬁcant past medical history presents to his pediatrician
                                           with irritability and one episode of stool mixed with blood and mucus. His mother notes
                                           that he began crying inconsolably for about 30 minutes after waking up early from his
                                           morning nap and then began acting like himself again. An hour later, he began crying
                                           again and was noted to be pulling his knees toward his abdomen. He continued to have
                                           episodes of irritability and crying that lasted approximately 20 minutes and occurred
                                           at 30–45-minute intervals. On examination, he is afebrile, and vital signs are within
                                           normal limits. He has normal rectal tone with Hemoccult-positive stool. Laboratory
                                           results are all unremarkable.

               What are the most common                  Gastrointestinal duplication.
                causes of lower gastrointestinal          Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).
                bleeding in infants?                      Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP).
                                                          Intussusception.
                                                          Lymphonodular hyperplasia.
                                                          Meckel’s diverticulum.
                                                          Milk- or soy-induced enterocolitis (allergic colitis).

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       The history of episodic colicky abdominal pain, with knees drawn
                                                         up to the chest, that wakened the child from sleep is classic for
                                                         intussusception. The stool with blood and mucus (currant-jelly stool)
                                                         is also suggestive of intussusception, the most common cause of bowel
                                                         obstruction in the ﬁrst 2 years of life. In this condition, a portion of
                                                         the bowel (often containing a lead point) telescopes into the adjacent

PE DIATRICS
                                                         bowel.
               What are some of the clinical            Patients typically develop sudden onset of intermittent, severe, crampy,
                manifestations that are associated       progressive abdominal pain, accompanied by inconsolable crying
                with this condition?                     and drawing of the legs up to the chest. The intussusception may
                                                         intermittently resolve, resulting in intervals when the child is pain free.
                                                         Vomiting and the passage of “currant-jelly” stool may occur. A sausage-
                                                         shaped mass may be felt in the right side of the abdomen. The classic
                                                         triad of pain, a sausage-shaped mass, and currant-jelly stool is seen in
                                                         < 15% of patients.
               What are some pathologic                  Cystic ﬁbrosis—thick, inspissated stool may act as lead point.
                conditions associated with this           Duplication cysts, polyps, vascular malformations.
                condition?                                Henoch-Schönlein purpura—bowel wall hematoma acts as lead
                                                           point.
                                                          Meckel’s diverticulum.
                                                          Parasites (e.g., Ascaris lumbricoides), adenovirus.
                                                          Preceding gastroenteritis.
                                                          Small bowel lymphoma (especially > 6 years of age).

              382
 What tests and/or imaging tools    Abdominal radiograph—may show intestinal obstruction, massively
  could be used to conﬁrm the         distended loops of bowel, or decreased air in the right lower
  diagnosis?                          quadrant. A soft tissue density (the intussusception) projecting into
                                      the gas of the large bowel is called the “crescent sign.”
                                     Abdominal ultrasound—highly sensitive and speciﬁc; classic image
                                      is the “bull’s-eye” or “coiled spring” lesion representing layers of the
                                      intestine within the intestine.
                                     Barium enema—conﬁrms the presence of a telescoping intraluminal
                                      intestinal mass.
 What is the most appropriate       Barium enema has been the standard diagnostic and therapeutic
  treatment for this condition?       tool for intussusception. Air enema can be used for treatment.
                                      This technique has a success rate of 80–90% and less potential for
                                      peritoneal cavity contamination should perforation occur.
                                     Recurrence after successful nonoperative reduction is ~10%.
                                     Surgery is necessary if enema reduction is unsuccessful.

                                                                                                                 PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                         383
               CASE 16                    A previously healthy 5-year-old boy presents to the emergency department with a 6-day
                                           history of fever and rash. Four days prior to admission the patient developed a small
                                           papular rash all over his body, bilateral conjunctival injection without exudate, and a
                                           temperature of 38.7° C (101.7° F). He was seen by his pediatrician on day 3 of fever
                                           and was diagnosed with a viral syndrome. The rash disappeared by day 4, but his fever
                                           persisted. On examination, he has a temperature of 39.0° C (102.2° F), heart rate of
                                           130/min, respiratory rate of 24/min, and blood pressure of 99/62 mm Hg. He is irritable
                                           and difﬁcult to console. His sclerae are injected bilaterally, and his oropharynx is mildly
                                           erythematous. His lips are dry and cracked. A 1.5 × 2-cm lymph node is palpable on the
                                           left anterior cervical chain. His chest is clear to auscultation. He does not have a rash.
                                           Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                           WBC count: 16,500/mm3
                                           Hemoglobin: 9.8 g/dL
                                           Platelet count: 420,000/mm3
                                           C-reactive protein: 23.15 mg/mL
                                           Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 75 mm/hr
                                           Urinalysis: small ketones, no WBCs, no blood

               What conditions should be                  Adenovirus, other viral exanthems.
                included in the differential               Cat-scratch disease.
                diagnosis?                                 Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus.
                                                           Hepatitis.
                                                           Infection with group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus or Staphylococcus.
                                                           Kawasaki disease.

PE DIATRICS
               The fever continues, and on day           The constellation of fever ≥ 5 days, rash, cervical adenopathy, cracked
                7 the patient develops edema              lips, injected sclerae, and edema of the hands and feet are most
                of the hands and feet with                consistent with Kawasaki disease, a vasculitis of small and large arteries.
                desquamation. What is the most
                likely diagnosis?
               How is this condition diagnosed?          Kawasaki disease is a clinical diagnosis, which requires the presence
                                                          of fever lasting at least 5 days, combined with at least four of the ﬁve
                                                          following physical ﬁndings:
                                                           Bilateral conjunctival injection.
                                                           Cervical lymphadenopathy (at least one lymph node > 1.5 cm).
                                                           Oral mucous membrane changes.
                                                           Peripheral extremity changes, including erythema of palms or soles
                                                            or edema of hands or feet.
                                                           Polymorphous rash.

               What is the natural history of this       Kawasaki disease is typically self-limited, with fever and manifestations
                condition?                                of acute inﬂammation lasting for an average of 12 days without therapy.
                                                          However, the disease may be complicated by the development of
                                                          aneurysms in coronary arteries, which can lead to myocardial ischemia
                                                          or infarction. In untreated patients, the incidence of coronary artery
                                                          aneurysms is about 20–25% with a mortality rate of approximately 2%.
               What is the most appropriate              Initial treatment is with intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), at a
                treatment for this condition?             dose of 2 g/kg infused over 12 hours. Long-term aspirin therapy is also
                                                          prescribed for its antithrombotic effects.
               What adverse events can rarely be          Anaphylactic hypersensitivity reactions.
                associated with initial treatment?         Aseptic meningitis.
                                                           Acute renal dysfunction.

              384
 CASE 17                   A 7-month-old boy presents to the emergency department with a history of lethargy. He
                            was seen by his pediatrician 3 days ago with fever and symptoms of an ear infection.
                            He was diagnosed with otitis media and treated with oral amoxicillin. The morning of
                            admission, he became irritable and was less active than usual. He has vomited three
                            times, and his urine output is noticeably decreased. He has no diarrhea. He has a
                            temperature of 40.2° C (104.0° F), heart rate of 100/min, respiratory rate of 20/min, and
                            blood pressure of 110/80 mm Hg. He is lethargic and arousable only to painful stimuli.
                            Physical examination shows his anterior fontanelle is full and tense. His tympanic
                            membranes are red and bulging. His pupils are reactive, but his eyes do not focus well
                            on his parents. His heart, lungs, and abdomen are normal. His color and perfusion are
                            good. He has no petechiae. He moves all his extremities weakly, and his deep tendon
                            reﬂexes are hyperactive.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Meningitis. Signs of meningitis include fever, vomiting, headache,
                                          lethargy, irritability, and stiff neck. On exam, there may be lethargy,
                                          irritability or coma, fever, bulging fontanelle (in infants), and nuchal
                                          rigidity (in children > 1 year old). Kernig’s sign (back pain when the
                                          leg is extended > 135 degrees with the hip ﬂexed to 90 degrees) and
                                          Brudzinski’s sign (ﬂexion of the patient’s hips and knees when the neck
                                          is ﬂexed) are rarely present in children < 2 years old.

 What is the most appropriate next       The workup should begin with a lumbar puncture (LP) to collect
  step in management?                     cerebrospinal ﬂuid for WBC count with differential, glucose,
                                          protein, RBC count, Gram stain, and culture. A CT scan should be

                                                                                                                        PE DIATRICS
                                          obtained prior to LP if signs of increased intracranial pressure or focal
                                          neurological signs are present. Other tests include a CBC, electrolytes,
                                          and blood cultures.
 Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) shows          In children, 90% of bacterial meningitis cases are caused by
  5000 WBC with 75% neutrophils,          Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli,
  glucose of 30 mg/dL, and protein        group B streptococci, and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type B. In patients
  of 300 mg/dL. What pathogens            > 6 months old, the three most common bacterial pathogens are
  are most likely causing this            S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and H. inﬂuenzae type B.
  condition?
 What is the most appropriate            Treatment should begin immediately with empiric intravenous
  treatment for this condition?           antibiotics. In children without known immune problems, high doses
                                          of third-generation cephalosporins, such as cefotaxime or ceftriaxone,
                                          plus vancomycin should be started. Additionally, dexamethasone is
                                          often given shortly before or at the time of initial administration of
                                          antibiotics in an attempt to diminish the incidence of hearing loss
                                          and other neurologic complications in children with H. inﬂuenzae or
                                          pneumococcal meningitis. However, steroid use is controversial.
 The Gram stain of the CSF                Gram-positive diplococci suggest pneumococcal infection.
  reveals gram-positive diplococci.        Gram-negative diplococci suggest meningococcal infection.
  What is the most likely diagnosis?       Small pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli suggest Haemophilus
                                             inﬂuenzae.
                                           Gram-positive cocci or coccobacilli suggest group B Streptococcus.
                                           Gram-positive rods and coccobacilli suggest listerial infection.

                                                                                                                385
               CASE 18                   A 6-day-old girl born at 35 weeks’ gestation is being evaluated because of a 24-hour
                                          history of abdominal distention, decreased feeding, and vomiting. She was delivered
                                          by induced vaginal delivery to a 26-year-old G2P2 mother with preeclampsia. She was
                                          stabilized in the neonatal intensive care unit and had been doing well with no signs of
                                          respiratory distress. Over the past day, she has gradually become more irritable and has
                                          been vomiting her formula. The last stool she passed was guaiac positive. The nurse
                                          also describes one episode where she appeared to stop breathing. On examination, she
                                          appears lethargic and is lying still. Her temperature is 37.8° C (100.1° F), heart rate is
                                          145/min, blood pressure is 91/60 mm Hg, and respiratory rate is 20/min. Birth weight
                                          was 1139 g (2 lb 8 oz), and her current weight is 1077 g (2 lb 6 oz). Her abdomen is
                                          distended and tender to palpation with decreased bowel sounds. Pulmonary and cardiac
                                          exams are within normal limits. X-ray of the abdomen reveals distended loops of bowel
                                          with pneumatosis intestinalis.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?      Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). NEC is a condition caused by bowel
                                                        ischemia with subsequent bacterial invasion of the intestinal wall. It is
                                                        most commonly seen in premature infants but has also been described
                                                        in full-term neonates. There are an estimated 2200 cases annually in
                                                        the United States, resulting in over 900 deaths.

               What signs and symptoms are             Many symptoms of NEC overlap signiﬁcantly with those of neonatal
                common in patients with this            sepsis, including temperature instability, lethargy, and apnea. GI
                condition?                              symptoms such as vomiting, bloody stool, and abdominal distention
                                                        should raise suspicion.

PE DIATRICS
               What radiographic ﬁndings are           X-ray of the abdomen may show pneumatosis intestinalis (air in the
                common in this condition?               bowel wall), air in the portal vein, or free air under the diaphragm
                                                        (signifying perforation), which are very suggestive of NEC.
               What is the most appropriate            Bowel rest is the ﬁrst step in managing these patients. Enteral feeds
                treatment for this condition?           are discontinued, and the bowel is decompressed with a nasogastric or
                                                        orogastric tube. IV ﬂuids and antibiotics are given. Serial abdominal
                                                        x-rays are performed to evaluate for bowel perforation, which
                                                        necessitates operative repair.
               What is the prognosis for patients      Despite aggressive treatment, mortality of NEC remains between 20%
                with this condition?                    and 40%. Serious complications include bowel perforation, sepsis,
                                                        and shock. Long-term sequelae can include intestinal strictures and
                                                        short gut syndrome. However, infants with uncomplicated NEC that
                                                        is medically managed have outcomes comparable with other infants at
                                                        their birth weight.

              386
 CASE 19                     A newborn infant boy is transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit because of a
                              defect in his abdominal wall. He was born by repeat low-transverse cesarean section at
                              term to a 34-year-old G4P4 mother who did not receive any prenatal care. She denies
                              any problems with this pregnancy. On examination, there is a 6-cm sac protruding from
                              the midline of the abdomen; bowel and liver can be seen within the sac. The infant is
                              hemodynamically stable and not in acute distress.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        An abdominal wall defect, speciﬁcally omphalocele. Omphalocele
                                            is the herniation of abdominal contents (bowel with or without liver
                                            and spleen) through the umbilical root into a membranous sac of
                                            peritoneum; it is differentiated from an umbilical hernia by length
                                            > 4 cm.

 What is the most appropriate              The abdominal cavity is typically underdeveloped in omphalocele, so
  management for this condition?            surgical repair is deferred. Contents are placed in a plastic covering
                                            termed a silo and gradually reduced into the abdomen until skin
                                            closure is possible.
 Would management change if the            Yes. Gastroschisis is an abdominal wall defect in which bowel alone
  bowel were herniated to the right         is eviscerated, usually to the right of the umbilicus; there is no
  of the umbilicus and not covered          peritoneal covering. This condition requires immediate surgical repair
  by peritoneum?                            due to the risks of dehydration and infection of exposed bowel. The
                                            abdominal cavity is typically better developed in gastroschisis; however,
                                            postoperative respiratory distress due to the increase in intra-abdominal
                                            pressure remains a concern.

                                                                                                                        PE DIATRICS
 How are abdominal wall defects            Both omphalocele and gastroschisis result in elevated levels of
  diagnosed prenatally?                     maternal serum α-fetoprotein (MSAFP), measured during the triple
                                            screen. Defects can also be visualized by prenatal ultrasound.
 What other conditions are                 Omphalocele is frequently associated with chromosomal anomalies
  associated with abdominal wall            (most commonly trisomy 18), heart defects, and congenital
  defects?                                  diaphragmatic hernia. In contrast, gastroschisis is typically an isolated
                                            abnormality; intestinal atresia and cryptorchidism are seen in some
                                            cases.

                                                                                                                  387
               CASE 20                    A 12-month-old girl is brought to the pediatrician for fever and fussiness. Her mother
                                           reports that her daughter has had a mild cough and nasal congestion for 1 week but has
                                           been acting normally. Two days ago, she developed a fever of 38.9° C (102.1° F) orally
                                           and became increasingly fussy. Her mother also notes that she has been tugging on her
                                           left ear. On physical examination, she is irritable and febrile to 38.8° C (101.8° F). Her
                                           left tympanic membrane (TM) is bulging and immobile. The remainder of her exam is
                                           unremarkable.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Acute otitis media (AOM). This infection is typically associated with
                                                          ﬂuid in the middle ear, known as an effusion. Signs seen on physical
                                                          examination include a bulging TM, TM with limited or no mobility,
                                                          the presence of an air-ﬂuid level, or visible pus behind the TM.
                                                          Additionally, symptoms of middle ear inﬂammation must be present,
                                                          such as erythema of the TM, otalgia, or fever.

               What risk factors are associated          AOM is more common in children than in adults; the eustachian
                with an increased incidence of            tube in children is more horizontal and less likely to drain middle
                this condition?                           ear ﬂuid, particularly during upper respiratory infections. Other risk
                                                          factors include parental smoking, day care attendance, and nighttime
                                                          bottle feeding. Breast-feeding and paciﬁer use have been found to be
                                                          protective.
               What pathogens are most                    Streptococcus pneumoniae
                commonly implicated in this                Haemophilus inﬂuenzae (nontypeable)
                condition?                                 Moraxella catarrhalis

PE DIATRICS
               What is the treatment for this            First-line therapy for AOM is high-dose amoxicillin; cefuroxime,
                condition?                                cefdinir, and cefpodoxime are alternatives in the case of amoxicillin
                                                          allergy. Resistant or recurrent AOM is treated with high-dose
                                                          amoxicillin-clavulanate or the above alternatives. Intramuscular
                                                          ceftriaxone is another option.
               What are the indications for              Tympanostomy tubes ventilate the middle ear and allow drainage of
                tympanostomy tubes?                       the effusion. They are placed by an ear, nose, and throat surgeon.
                                                          Typical indications include prolonged effusion (3–4 months) with or
                                                          without infection or multiple ear infections (4 in 6 months, or 6 in
                                                          1 year). Tubes typically remain in place up to 12 months. Tubes allow
                                                          for spontaneous drainage of ﬂuid in subsequent infections.
               What are the potential                    Untreated AOM can result in direct damage to middle ear structures,
                complications if this condition is        with such ﬁndings as tympanosclerosis, cholesteatoma, or TM
                left untreated?                           perforation. Rarely, infection can extend into adjacent structures and
                                                          cause mastoiditis or meningitis. Facial nerve paralysis can also be seen
                                                          due to inﬂammation in the middle ear.

              388
 CASE 21                     A 3-day-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his mother, who is worried that her
                              son is turning progressively yellow. He was born by spontaneous vaginal delivery at 36
                              weeks’ gestation to a 25-year-old G1P1; she had good prenatal care, and there were no
                              complications with the pregnancy. He was discharged from the newborn nursery at 30
                              hours. He is breast-feeding and stooling well. On examination, he is a well-appearing
                              infant with marked jaundice over his face and torso. Serum studies reveal total bilirubin
                              of 13 mg/dL with conjugated bilirubin < 0.3 mg/dL.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?         Physiologic jaundice, likely breast-feeding jaundice. Prenatally,
                                             bilirubin is cleared through the placenta; postnatally, there is increased
                                             production of bilirubin coupled with lower rates of hepatic uptake
                                             and conjugation that lead to an almost universal hyperbilirubinemia
                                             in the ﬁrst week of life. Acceptable levels of bilirubin vary based on
                                             the infant’s gestational age and postnatal age. Breast-feeding has been
                                             associated with physiologic jaundice. Physiologic jaundice is generally
                                             seen after the ﬁrst 24 hours of life, peaks at 3 days, and resolves over
                                             2 weeks.

 What are the two types of                   Breast-feeding jaundice occurs in the ﬁrst 2–4 days and resolves
  jaundice associated with breast-             rapidly.
  feeding?                                    Breast milk jaundice occurs in 4–7 days and is longer lasting.

 What is the differential diagnosis          Increased bilirubin production:
  of nonphysiologic jaundice?                   Hemolysis (isoimmunization vs. genetic condition).
                                                Sepsis.

                                                                                                                          PE DIATRICS
                                                Hematoma/hemorrhage (e.g., cephalohematoma).
                                              Increased enterohepatic circulation: Bowel obstruction or ileus.
                                              Decreased clearance:
                                                Prematurity.
                                                Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deﬁciency.
                                              Inborn errors of metabolism:
                                                Crigler-Najjar syndrome.
                                                Gilbert syndrome.
                                                Galactosemia.
                                              Metabolic: Hypothyroidism.

 What is the feared outcome of              Kernicterus (neurotoxicity resulting from deposition of bilirubin in
  untreated neonatal jaundice?               the basal ganglia). Affected infants have altered tone, a high-pitched
                                             cry, and lethargy. Long-term sequelae include mental retardation,
                                             sensorineural hearing loss, choreoathetoid cerebral palsy, and
                                             abnormalities of upward gaze.
 What is the most appropriate               Infants with excessively high bilirubin levels for their age are treated
  treatment for neonatal jaundice?           to prevent kernicterus. Moderate elevations (usually 12–20 mg/dL) are
                                             often treated with phototherapy, in which the infant is placed under a
                                             blue-green light that converts bilirubin in the skin to isomers that can
                                             be excreted without conjugation. Severe elevations (above 20–25
                                             mg/dL) often require exchange transfusion.

                                                                                                                  389
               CASE 22                      A 6-week-old boy is referred to the emergency department by his pediatrician for
                                             dehydration and vomiting. The infant had been feeding well until 3 weeks prior to
                                             admission when he began having nonbloody and nonbilious vomiting after most feeds.
                                             In the week prior to admission, the vomiting had increased in frequency and force,
                                             becoming projectile and occurring after every feed. Review of systems is signiﬁcant for
                                             increased sleepiness in the past 2 days, decreased urine output, and less frequent bowel
                                             movements. His mother denies any diarrhea, hematochezia, or fever. On examination,
                                             the child has normal vital signs, with height at the 50th percentile and weight at the
                                             30th percentile. Physical examination is signiﬁcant for a sunken anterior fontanelle.
                                             Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                             WBC count: 9000/mm3                    Cl–: 75 mEq/L
                                             Hemoglobin: 15.4 g/dL                  HCO3–: 47 mEq/L
                                             Platelet count: 255,000/mm3            Blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 51 mg/dL
                                             Na+: 130 mEq/L                         Creatinine: 0.9 mg/dL
                                             K+: 3.9 mEq/L

               What conditions should be                    Enterocolitis.
                included in the differential                 Esophagitis.
                diagnosis?                                   Gastric outlet obstruction: pyloric stenosis.
                                                             Serious bacterial infection (e.g., meningitis, urinary tract infection).
                                                             Severe gastroesophageal reﬂux.
                                                             Small bowel obstruction: duodenal atresia, malrotation, volvulus.

               What is the physiology of                   This patient has a hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis (low chloride

PE DIATRICS
                this patient’s electrolyte                  levels, high bicarbonate level) resulting from the loss of large amounts
                abnormalities?                              of gastric hydrochloric acid. Hypokalemia is not typically seen early
                                                            but can also occur in infants who have prolonged vomiting (> 3 weeks)
                                                            as a result of a shift of hydrogen ions into the extracellular space and
                                                            potassium to the intracellular space. His elevated BUN is most likely
                                                            due to dehydration.
               What would be the most likely               Pyloric stenosis. The “olive-like” mass (felt best after emesis or
                diagnosis if an “olive-like” mass           emptying of the stomach with a nasogastric tube) is produced by
                was palpated in the right upper             hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the antral and pyloric musculature.
                quadrant of the abdomen?
               What tests and/or imaging tools             Diagnosis is straightforward when the “olive” is palpated; otherwise, it
                could be used to conﬁrm the                 can be difﬁcult to differentiate pyloric stenosis from gastroesophageal
                diagnosis of the condition in the           reﬂux, especially in the early stages. Imaging modalities include:
                question above?                              Abdominal ultrasound: typically reveals thickening of pyloric muscle
                                                              wall.
                                                             Radiograph of the abdomen: may show a markedly distended
                                                              stomach with a paucity of bowel gas beyond the stomach.
                                                             Upper endoscopy: typically reserved for patients in whom other
                                                              imaging modalities are inconclusive.
                                                             Upper GI barium study: classic signs are an elongated pyloric canal,
                                                              the “double-track” sign (two thin tracks along the pyloric canal), and
                                                              the “shoulder” sign created by the prepyloric bulge of barium.
               What drug has been associated               An association exists between pyloric stenosis and oral erythromycin
                with this condition?                        given to infants in the ﬁrst 2 weeks of life.
               What is the most appropriate                An incision is made along the mucosa for the length of the pylorus
                treatment for this condition?               (pyloromyotomy).

              390
 CASE 23                     A 2-hour-old neonate boy in the newborn nursery is found to have respiratory distress.
                              He was born at 37 weeks’ gestation to a 25-year-old G1P1 mother who had an
                              uncomplicated pregnancy and normal prenatal laboratory values. His Apgar scores
                              were 9 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. On examination, he is afebrile with
                              heart rate of 170/min, respiratory rate of 80/min, blood pressure of 65/40 mm Hg, and
                              oxygen saturation of 95% on 2 L/min oxygen via mask. His length, weight, and head
                              circumference are at the 50th percentile. He is in obvious respiratory distress. His head
                              is normocephalic and his anterior fontanelle is open and ﬂat. He has some nasal ﬂaring.
                              Lung and cardiac auscultation are normal, although mild to moderate retractions are
                              present. His skin is pink without petechiae, ecchymoses, or lesions. The remainder of
                              his examination is unremarkable. An x-ray of the chest reveals streaky, perihilar densities
                              and small, scattered, patchy densities bilaterally.

 What is the differential diagnosis          Meconium aspiration.
  for respiratory distress in the             Pneumonia (typically group B Streptococcus).
  newborn?                                    Pulmonary air leak: pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, or
                                               pneumopericardium.
                                              Respiratory distress syndrome.
                                              Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN).

 What is the most likely diagnosis?         Since this patient is a term male with no known complications during
                                             pregnancy, labor, or delivery, the most likely diagnosis is TTN. TTN is
                                             a self-limited parenchymal lung disorder characterized by pulmonary
                                             edema resulting from delayed resorption and clearance of fetal lung

                                                                                                                            PE DIATRICS
                                             ﬂuid. TTN is a common cause of respiratory distress in the immediate
                                             newborn period. Potential causes include short labor and cesarean
                                             section, because mechanisms to reabsorb lung ﬂuid are not initiated.
 What common ﬁndings are                     Breath sounds in affected infants typically are clear, without rales or
  associated with this condition?              rhonchi.
                                              Characteristic ﬁndings on chest radiograph include ﬂuid in the
                                               ﬁssures and central/perihilar congestion.
                                              Cyanosis and increased work of breathing, manifested by nasal
                                               ﬂaring, mild intercostal and subcostal retractions, and expiratory
                                               grunting.
                                              Tachypnea (respiratory rate > 60/min) is the most prominent feature.

 What is the prognosis for patients         Infants with mild to moderate TTN are symptomatic for 12–24 hours,
  with this condition?                       but signs may persist as long as 72 hours in severe cases. Infants rarely
                                             require a supplemental oxygen concentration > 40% to achieve
                                             adequate oxygenation. TTN is generally self-limiting and has no long-
                                             term sequelae.
 If this patient had been born a            Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is the most common disorder
  month earlier, what would be the           of the premature infant. Most infants are < 34 weeks’ gestation, and
  most likely diagnosis?                     disease incidence and severity increase with decreasing gestation age.
                                             These premature infants have progressively more severe respiratory
                                             distress after birth. The major etiology of RDS is surfactant deﬁciency.
                                             Without surfactant, the surface tension of the alveolar sacs is high,
                                             leading to an increased tendency of the alveoli to collapse. Risk factors
                                             include maternal diabetes, male sex, and the second born of twins.
 If this patient had been born a            The classic ﬁndings of RDS on chest x-ray include decreased lung
  month earlier, what would an               inﬂation with diffuse symmetric reticulogranular lung ﬁelds (ground-
  x-ray of the chest most likely             glass appearance) and air bronchograms.
  show?

                                                                                                                    391
               CASE 24                    A 9-month-old boy presents to the emergency department in January with a 1-day
                                           history of fever and wheezing. Three days prior, he had developed nasal congestion
                                           and a mild cough. He was born prematurely at 36 weeks but is otherwise healthy.
                                           On examination, he has a temperature of 39.2° C (102.5° F), heart rate of 130/min,
                                           respiratory rate of 28/min, and oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. He is a well-
                                           nourished, acyanotic infant in moderate respiratory distress. He has clear rhinorrhea,
                                           no conjunctival injection, and moderate intercostal and subcostal retractions. Lung
                                           examination is signiﬁcant for diffuse expiratory wheezing. No murmurs or gallops are
                                           heard on cardiac examination. The remainder of his examination is normal. An x-ray of
                                           the chest is notable for hyperinﬂation and peribronchial thickening.

               What is the differential diagnosis        Bronchiolitis.
                of new-onset wheezing in infants?         Chronic lung disease.
                                                          Congenital heart disease, heart failure.
                                                          Foreign body aspiration.
                                                          Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease with aspiration.
                                                          Pneumonia.
                                                          Reactive airway disease.
                                                          Vascular rings (a condition in which an anomalous aortic arch and/
                                                           or associated vessels surround the trachea and esophagus, completely
                                                           encircling and often compressing them).

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Bronchiolitis. Bronchiolitis typically affects children < 2 years,
                                                         principally in the winter months. The majority of cases of

PE DIATRICS
                                                         bronchiolitis are caused by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Other
                                                         pathogens include parainﬂuenza, inﬂuenza, adenovirus, and human
                                                         metapneumovirus.
               In pediatric patients with this           Age < 6 months.
                diagnosis, what risk factors              Chronic lung disease.
                predispose for more severe                Congenital heart disease.
                disease?                                  Immunodeﬁciency.
                                                          Prematurity.

               What is the epidemiology of this         RSV causes seasonal outbreaks throughout the world. In the northern
                condition?                               hemisphere, these usually occur from November to April, with peaks in
                                                         January or February. RSV pneumonia has been blamed for an average
                                                         of 2700 adult and pediatric deaths each year. RSV is the most common
                                                         cause of lower respiratory tract infection in children < 1 year old.
               What is the most appropriate             Treatment for RSV bronchiolitis consists of supportive measures,
                treatment for this condition?            including oxygen supplementation and nasal suctioning. Nasogastric
                                                         feedings or intravenous ﬂuids are useful in maintaining hydration in
                                                         the presence of tachypnea and decreased oral intake.
               If this patient had                      The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that
                hemodynamically signiﬁcant               immunoprophylaxis be considered for certain groups of children
                congenital heart disease, what           who are at risk for severe RSV infection. Palivizumab is a humanized
                would be the recommended                 monoclonal antibody against the RSV F glycoprotein. It is licensed for
                prophylaxis for this condition?          use in children < 2 years of age with chronic lung disease, premature
                                                         birth (< 35 weeks), or hemodynamically signiﬁcant congenital heart
                                                         disease.

              392
 CASE 25                     An 8-month-old girl is brought to the hospital because of motor deterioration and
                              convulsions. She was born at 38 weeks’ gestation without complications. Her past
                              medical history was unremarkable, and she had been meeting her developmental
                              milestones normally until 2 weeks prior to admission, when her parents noted that she
                              had lost the ability to sit unassisted. On the morning of admission she had a tonic-clonic
                              seizure lasting 2 minutes. Physical examination is signiﬁcant for generalized hypotonia
                              and macrocephaly. She is also noted to have a dramatic startle reﬂex. Ophthalmic
                              examination reveals a retinal cherry-red spot. She has no evidence of organomegaly.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?         The child’s motor deterioration and loss of milestones suggest a
                                             metabolic disorder. The exaggerated startle reﬂex and the retinal
                                             cherry-red spot are most consistent with Tay-Sachs disease.

 What is the pathogenesis of this           Tay-Sachs disease results from a mutation in β-hexosaminidase A. The
  condition?                                 absence of the hexosaminidase enzyme causes lysosomal accumulation
                                             of GM2 gangliosides, particularly in the central nervous system.
                                             This ongoing accumulation causes progressive cellular damage. In
                                             children, the destructive process begins in the fetus early in pregnancy,
                                             although the disease is not clinically apparent until the child is several
                                             months old. The retinal cherry-red spot is the result of accumulation
                                             of GM2 in the ganglion cells in the retina. (Mnemonic: Tay-saX lacks
                                             heXosaminidase.)
 What is the epidemiology and               Tay-Sachs disease is an autosomal recessive trait. The incidence of
  mode of inheritance of this                the disease is signiﬁcantly higher among people of eastern European

                                                                                                                           PE DIATRICS
  condition?                                 (Ashkenazi) Jewish descent, with a carrier rate of about 1 in 30. The
                                             carrier rate is about 1 in 300 for the general population.
 If this patient also had doll-like         Sandhoff disease, a more rare and severe form of Tay-Sachs, results
  facies, hepatosplenomegaly, and            from mutations in the β-subunit gene. This leads to deﬁciency of both
  cardiomegaly, what would be the            β-hexosaminidases A and B (as opposed to Tay-Sachs, in which only
  likely diagnosis?                          β-hexosaminidase A is absent).
 What is the prognosis for patients         Patients with the infantile form of Tay-Sachs disease have clinical
  with this condition?                       manifestations in infancy of loss of motor skills, increased startle
                                             reaction, and macular pallor with retinal cherry-red spots. Affected
                                             infants usually develop normally until 4–5 months of age, when
                                             decreased eye contact and an exaggerated startle response to
                                             noise (hyperacusis) are noted. Macrocephaly, not associated with
                                             hydrocephalus, may develop. In the second year of life, seizures
                                             requiring anticonvulsant therapy develop. Neurodegeneration is
                                             relentless, with death occurring by the age of 4 or 5 years.

                                                                                                                    393
               CASE 26                   A 5-month-old boy is brought to the emergency department for cyanosis. The child
                                          was born full term and was noted to be mildly cyanotic at birth. The cyanosis resolved
                                          after 20 minutes, and he was discharged home after 3 days. His parents note that he
                                          occasionally has episodes of irritability, crying, hyperventilation, and breathlessness
                                          that are usually self-limiting and are followed in most cases by a period of sleep. His
                                          mother also notes that he has occasional difﬁculty breathing while breast-feeding. On
                                          the morning of admission, his parents noticed that his lips and ﬁngertips turned blue
                                          while he was crying. On physical examination, the patient is sleeping comfortably with
                                          no signs of respiratory distress. His heart rate is 130/min, respiratory rate is 24/min, blood
                                          pressure is 95/65 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation is 92% on room air. Subtle cyanosis
                                          of his mucous membranes is present. Cardiac examination reveals a normal S1 and
                                          a single S2. A 4/6 systolic ejection murmur is heard loudest at the left upper sternal
                                          border. His lungs are clear to auscultation bilaterally. The remainder of the physical
                                          examination is unremarkable.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?       Congenital heart disease must be considered in a patient presenting
                                                         with cyanosis and a heart murmur. The history of episodes of dyspnea,
                                                         irritability, and cyanosis during exertion (crying) are suggestive of
                                                         tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and most likely represent “tet spells,” which
                                                         are caused by reduction of an already compromised pulmonary blood
                                                         ﬂow and occur spontaneously or following periods of exertion. (Think
                                                         of the 5 Terrible T’s for cyanotic congenital heart disease: Tetralogy
                                                         of Fallot, Truncus arteriosus, Tricuspid atresia, Total anomalous
                                                         pulmonary return, and Transposition of the great vessels.)

PE DIATRICS
               What are the anatomic features of         A ventricular septal defect—due to septal malalignment.
                this condition?                           An overriding aorta that receives blood from both ventricles.
                                                          Right ventricular hypertrophy—due to the high-pressure load placed
                                                            on the right ventricle by the pulmonic stenosis.
                                                          Subvalvular pulmonic stenosis—due to obstruction from the
                                                            infundibulum.
               Which of the anatomic anomalies          Right ventricular outﬂow tract obstruction, caused by pulmonic
                present in this condition most           stenosis, determines the clinical presentation of the patient. Children
                determines the severity of the           with severe obstruction and inadequate pulmonary blood ﬂow typically
                cyanosis?                                present in the immediate newborn period with profound cyanosis,
                                                         while children with minimal obstruction may be asymptomatic and
                                                         present later in life with pulmonary congestion and heart failure.
               What are some of the typical              X-ray of the chest: The classic presentation is a “boot-shaped” heart
                imaging and laboratory ﬁndings?            resulting from a large right ventricle and a decrease in the size of the
                                                           main pulmonary artery. Pulmonary vascular markings are usually
                                                           diminished.
                                                          Echocardiography: Details all essential features of the defects.
                                                          Electrocardiogram: Right atrial enlargement and right ventricular
                                                           hypertrophy.

              394
 What other cardiac abnormalities      Approximately 40% of patients with TOF have associated cardiac
  are associated with this condition?   anomalies, including:
                                         Right aortic arch (40%).
                                         Atrial septal defect (10%).
                                         Abnormalities of the coronary arteries (9%).

 What are some noncardiac               Alagille syndrome.
  anomalies associated with this         DiGeorge and velocardiofacial syndromes due to a deletion on
  condition?                              chromosome 22q11.
                                         Trisomy 21.

                                                                                                               PE DIATRICS

                                                                                                         395
               CASE 27                    A 2-year-old girl is brought to her pediatrician for evaluation of a new rash. Her mother
                                           notes that she had a fever to 38.3° C (101.0° F) yesterday and complained of headache
                                           and abdominal pain. She awakened this morning with a pruritic rash on her face. She
                                           has no past medical history, but neither she nor her sister, who is also sick, is up to
                                           date on their vaccinations; her last immunizations were received at 9 months of age.
                                           On examination, she is playful and interactive. Her temperature is 36.9° C (98.5° F),
                                           heart rate is 85/min, blood pressure is 95/75 mm Hg, and respiratory rate is 14/min.
                                           There are small vesicles across her face, and the skin surrounding each vesicle appears
                                           erythematous. Linear excoriations are present. A few papules are visible on her neck
                                           and shoulders.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?        Varicella, or chickenpox. Infection with varicella-zoster virus (VZV)
                                                          results in a highly contagious, self-limited disease with a characteristic
                                                          pruritic rash. Papular lesions evolve into small vesicles on an
                                                          erythematous base, the “dewdrops on a rose petal.” The vesicles crust
                                                          over within days, as new lesions appear; the disease typically resolves
                                                          within 5 days. Chickenpox is predominantly seen in children < 10
                                                          years old; viral reactivation in adults manifests as herpes zoster.

               How can this condition be                 See Table 13-1.
                differentiated from other viral
                exanthems?
               How can this condition be                 Two doses of the live attenuated VZV vaccine are typically
                prevented?                                administered between 12 and 18 months of age.

PE DIATRICS
               What is the most appropriate              For immunocompetent children, treatment focuses on relief of pruritus
                treatment for this condition?             with oral antihistamines, topical calamine lotion, and cool compresses.
                                                          Immunocompromised individuals and older patients at risk of more
                                                          severe disease are often treated with acyclovir.
               When is varicella-zoster immune           VZIG is used for prophylaxis in exposed individuals at high risk for
                globulin (VZIG) used?                     severe disease. This includes immunocompromised patients and
                                                          newborns whose mothers have active varicella at or soon after delivery.

              396
TA B L E 13 - 1 .   Features of the Common Pediatric Viral Exanthems

   DISEASE             PATHOGEN           RASH                    OTHER SYMPTOMS       COMPLICATIONS          VACCINE

   Varicella           Varicella-zoster   Pruritic; vesicles on   May have short       Secondary              Live attenuated
                       virus (VZV)        erythematous base;      prodrome of fever,   bacterial infection,   VZV vaccine
                                          begins on the face      malaise              pneumonia,
                                          and spreads to trunk                         encephalitis,
                                                                                       Reye’s syndrome

   Rubeola             Paramyxovirus      Maculopapular;          High fever, runny    Otitis media,          Live-attenuated
                                          begins on cheeks        nose, dry cough,     pneumonia,             measles, mumps,
                                          and spreads to chest    Koplik spots         encephalitis           and rubella
                                          and upper arms                                                      (MMR) vaccine

   Fifth disease       Parvovirus B19     “Slapped cheek” rash    Prodrome of          Arthropathy,           None
                                          spreads to trunk and    low-grade fever,     transient aplastic
                                          extremities             upper respiratory    crisis in patients
                                                                  infection (URI)      with chronic
                                                                  symptoms             hemolysis

   Roseola             Human              Small raised lesions;   High fever that      None                   None
                       herpesvirus 6      start on trunk and      breaks with rash
                       and 7              spread to face,         onset, mild URI

                                                                                                                                    PE DIATRICS
                                          proximal extremities    symptoms

   Rubella             Rubella virus      Nonpruritic; begins     Mild fever           Rare progressive       Live attenuated
                                          on face, then spreads   prodrome, mild       panencephalitis        MMR vaccine
                                          to trunk                conjunctivitis

                                                                                                                              397
               CASE 28                      A 4-month-old boy is brought to his pediatrician because of an increased difﬁculty in
                                             breathing and poor weight gain. His mother notes that he often perspires and appears
                                             dusky during feeds. His past medical history is signiﬁcant for a suspected pneumonia
                                             at 2 months of age that resolved with antibiotic therapy. He was born full term without
                                             complications. His physical examination is remarkable for a 4/6 blowing holosystolic
                                             murmur in the left lower sternal border as well as a diastolic rumble heard at the apex.

               What is the most likely diagnosis?          The child’s history of dyspnea, feeding difﬁculties, and duskiness
                                                            without frank cyanosis, combined with the blowing holosystolic
                                                            murmur, is suggestive of a large, nonrestrictive ventricular septal defect
                                                            (VSD).

               Assuming the patient has had                Normally, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) declines over the ﬁrst
                appropriate medical care, why               several weeks of life. In infants with a large VSD, the decline in PVR
                might this condition not have               may be delayed for several months. Thus, the size of the left-to-right
                been diagnosed until 4 months of            shunt may initially be small. A murmur related to a large VSD is heard
                age?                                        as soon as a signiﬁcant difference is reached in the level of resistance
                                                            between the pulmonary and systemic vascular circuits. Because the
                                                            natural decrease in PVR may not reach a point that would allow for a
                                                            substantial amount of blood to ﬂow across the defect for the ﬁrst few
                                                            months of life, a murmur related to a large VSD may not be heard
                                                            until the 2- to 4-month postnatal visit.
               What is the physiology of the               The murmur of a large VSD is holosystolic, reﬂecting the persistent
                heart murmur?                               pressure difference between the right and left ventricles throughout

PE DIATRICS
                                                            systole. It is heard best at the left lower sternal border. A low-pitched
                                                            diastolic rumble at the apex is caused by a relative mitral stenosis
                                                            secondary to the increased blood volume returning to the left atrium.
                                                            In small (restrictive) VSDs, the murmur can be signiﬁcantly louder
                                                            due to turbulent blood ﬂow across the small lesion.
               What are the typical radiographic           In large VSDs, the chest x-ray shows gross cardiomegaly with
                and electrocardiographic ﬁndings            prominence of both ventricles, the left atrium, and the pulmonary
                in this condition?                          artery. Pulmonary vascular markings are increased, and frank
                                                            pulmonary edema, including pleural effusions, may be present. The
                                                            electrocardiogram shows biventricular hypertrophy; P waves may be
                                                            notched or peaked.
               If this condition were not                  Infants with small VSDs usually remain asymptomatic. In contrast,
                diagnosed, what other symptoms              infants with moderate to large VSDs can begin to manifest signs
                would this patient likely develop           of pulmonary congestion and heart failure by 3–4 weeks of age.
                over time?                                  Symptoms include: tachypnea, poor feeding (tires easily, sweats),
                                                            poor weight gain, tachycardia, respiratory infections, hepatomegaly,
                                                            pulmonary rales, grunting, and retractions. If a large VSD is
                                                            undiagnosed or untreated for years, patients can develop Eisenmenger
                                                            syndrome, an irreversible condition caused by right-to-left shunting
                                                            due to high PVR.
               What is the most appropriate                A large VSD does not undergo spontaneous closure; therefore, surgery
                treatment for this condition?               is required. A VSD with a pulmonary-to-systemic ﬂow ratio > 2:1 (as
                                                            calculated by cardiac catheterization) is considered physiologically
                                                            large and requires surgical closure. Pulmonary vascular disease can be
                                                            prevented when surgery is performed in the ﬁrst year of life.

              398
 CASE 29                     A 3-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician because his mother noticed a “tennis-
                              ball” sized mass in the lower-right side of his abdomen while giving him a bath. He is
                              otherwise healthy, and his past medical history is unremarkable. On examination, he
                              has a temperature of 36.5° C (97.7° F), heart rate of 120/min, respiratory rate of
                              18/min, and blood pressure of 98/65 mm Hg. He has a nontender 4 × 4-cm smooth,
                              ﬁrm mass in the right lower quadrant and mild abdominal distention. The remainder of
                              his examination is normal.

 What is the differential diagnosis        Prior to the advent of prenatal ultrasound, hydronephrosis was the
  of an abdominal mass in a                 most common abdominal mass in the newborn period. Wilms’ tumor
  pediatric patient?                        and neuroblastoma are the most common intra-abdominal tumors;
                                            others include leukemia, lymphoma, hepatic tumors, ovarian tumors,
                                            and soft-tissue sarcomas. The age of the child helps in the differential
                                            diagnosis. Wilms’ tumor and neuroblastoma occur more commonly in
                                            infants, whereas leukemic or lymphomatous involvement of the liver,
                                            spleen, or retroperitoneal lymph nodes occurs more commonly in
                                            older children.

 An abdominal ultrasound shows a           Wilms’ tumor (“nephroblastoma”), the most common intra-abdominal
  right intrarenal mass. What is the        malignancy in children.
  most likely diagnosis?
 What is the pathogenesis of this          Wilms’ tumor is a complex mixed embryonal neoplasm of the kidney
  mass?                                     composed of three elements: blastema, epithelia, and stroma.

                                                                                                                        PE DIATRICS
 What are some congenital                   Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome—characterized by
  abnormalities associated with this          hemihypertrophy, macroglossia, and visceromegaly.
  condition?                                 Denys-Drash syndrome—comprised of male
                                              pseudohermaphroditism, early-onset renal failure, and increased risk
                                              of Wilms’ tumor.
                                             Neuroﬁbromatosis.
                                             Von Willebrand disease.
                                             WAGR syndrome—comprised of Wilms’ tumor, aniridia,
                                              genitourinary abnormalities, and mental retardation; caused by a
                                              constitutional deletion of chromosome 11p13.
 What is the most appropriate              Wilms’ tumor is treated with surgical resection and chemotherapy.
  treatment for this condition?             Speciﬁc treatment and prognosis depend on the staging of the tumor.
 If this patient had presented             Neuroblastoma, a malignancy arising from neural crest cells. It is the
  with an abdominal mass and had            second most common malignancy of childhood. In approximately two-
  elevated vanillylmandelic acid            thirds of patients, the primary site is in the abdomen (usually adrenal);
  (VMA) in his urine, what would            the thoracic region is the second most common site. Neuroblastoma
  be the most likely diagnosis?             tumor cells are characterized by defective catecholamine synthesis,
                                            which results in the accumulation and excretion of the intermediates
                                            homovanillic acid (HVA), VMA, and dopamine. Secretion of these
                                            catecholamines may give rise to symptoms such as hypertension. HVA
                                            and VMA can be measured in the urine and are useful in diagnosis and
                                            in monitoring disease activity.

                                                                                                                399
                    N OT E S

PE DIATRICS

              400
Psychiatry

Case 1       402

Case 2       404

Case 3       405

Case 4       406

Case 5       407

Case 6       408

Case 7       410

Case 8       412

Case 9       413

Case 10      414

Case 11      415

Case 12      416

Case 13      417

Case 14      418

Case 15      420

Case 16      422

Case 17      423

Case 18      424

Case 19      425

Case 20      426

Case 21      428

Case 22      429

Case 23      430

Case 24      432

                   401
                CASE 1                    A 19-year-old student is being evaluated at his student health center. The physician
                                           notes the young man is tachycardic at 101/min with a blood pressure of 145/93
                                           mm Hg. His pupils are dilated, and there is a ﬁne tremor in his hands. The patient
                                           appears agitated and is sweating. The student says he is just anxious about upcoming
                                           ﬁnal examinations, but when questioned further he becomes angry and belligerent.
                                           He ﬁnally admits that for the past 2 weeks he has been taking pills his roommate gave
                                           him in order to help him stay awake. He says they improve his concentration and allow
                                           him to get by on only a few hours of sleep. He has not been eating as much and says
                                           his clothes are ﬁtting more loosely on him. He does not see a problem with this, saying
                                           many people in the dormitory do the same thing and that he will stop taking the pills
                                           after his exams are done. The rest of the physical examination is unremarkable. On
                                           mental status examination, he is alert and oriented to person, place, and time. He is
                                           mildly uncooperative, and his speech is rapid. He describes his mood as “terriﬁc,” but
                                           his affect is angry. He denies suicidal or homicidal ideation, perceptual disturbances, or
                                           delusions. He does not have a prior history of mental illness.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Amphetamine intoxication. He admits to recent use of pills acquired
                                                          from his roommate to help him study. Although it is not known
                                                          exactly what kind of pills he has been taking, the illicit use of
                                                          dextroamphetamines is a signiﬁcant problem on college campuses.
                                                          According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
                                                          Disorders, 4th ed., Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), this patient is most
                                                          likely experiencing amphetamine intoxication: He has not been
                                                          sleeping or eating regularly, and there is evidence of recent weight loss;

PSYC H IATRY
                                                          his pulse and blood pressure are elevated, his pupils are dilated, and a
                                                          tremor is present. He is also exhibiting behavioral and psychological
                                                          changes, such as euphoria, anxiety, tension, and anger. Abuse of
                                                          stimulants may also result in symptoms of psychosis such as paranoid
                                                          delusions.

                What are the DSM-IV-TR criteria          The criteria for substance abuse can be remembered with the
                 for substance abuse?                     mnemonic HARP:
                                                          Hazardous use (e.g., driving while intoxicated).
                                                          Arrests (legal problems).
                                                          Role failure (repeated work absences due to substance use).
                                                          Persistent use despite consequences.
                                                          Only one of these four criteria need be met during a 12-month period.
                                                          Substance dependency is diagnosed by meeting three of seven criteria
                                                          within a 12-month period. The criteria for substance dependency can
                                                          be remembered with the mnemonic WITHDrawIT:
                                                          Withdrawal.
                                                          Interest or important activities given up or reduced.
                                                          Tolerance.
                                                          Harm (physical and psychosocial) with continued use.
                                                          Desire to cut down or control use.
                                                          Intended time/amount of use exceeded.
                                                          Time spent obtaining/using the substance is increased.
                                                          This patient does not meet the criteria for substance dependency.

               402
 What might happen if the patient      Amphetamine withdrawal is characterized by fatigue, depression,
  suddenly stopped taking this          nightmares, headache, profuse sweating, muscle cramps, and hunger.
  drug?                                 Withdrawal symptoms such as intense dysphoria usually peak in 2–4
                                        days and resolve within 1 week.
 Is treatment necessary for patients   Since amphetamine intoxication and withdrawal are generally self-
  with this condition?                  limiting, no speciﬁc treatment is necessary. Benzodiazepines (e.g.,
                                        diazepam, lorazepam) can be used to treat agitation or anxiety but have
                                        their own abuse potential. Therapeutic drugs to treat the withdrawal
                                        are not routinely used in clinical practice.

                                                                                                                  PSYC H IATRY

                                                                                                          403
                CASE 2                    A 64-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by ambulance after losing
                                           consciousness at a local bar. On arrival he is awake but intoxicated, and physical
                                           examination reveals a haggard-looking man with contusions on his left elbow and
                                           knee. His blood alcohol level is 307 mg/dL, and a urine toxicology screen excludes
                                           the presence of other substances. He tells the physician that he has been in and out of
                                           alcohol treatment facilities several times and once had a seizure when he tried to stop
                                           drinking. He is admitted to the hospital for observation. The next morning, a mental
                                           status examination reveals he is alert and oriented to person, place, and time. His
                                           speech is of normal rate and tone, and he is cooperative with the physician. He tells the
                                           examiner that the previous night he consumed 8–10 beers and several shots. His mood
                                           is depressed; his affect is congruent and dysphoric. Otherwise, no abnormalities are
                                           noted.

                What is alcohol withdrawal               This syndrome includes a continuum of signs and symptoms, ranging
                 syndrome?                                from tremulousness to delirium tremens (DTs).
                                                           Mild alcohol withdrawal usually occurs < 24 hours after cessation of
                                                             or decrease in alcohol intake. It may include tremulousness, anxiety,
                                                             nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, hyperreﬂexia, and minor autonomic
                                                             hyperactivity.
                                                           Moderate alcohol withdrawal is an intermediate position along the
                                                             continuum. Hallucinosis can occur, which consists of hallucinations
                                                             with an otherwise clear sensorium.
                                                           Severe alcohol withdrawal occurs > 24 hours and up to 5 days after
                                                             cessation of or decrease in alcohol intake. It is characterized by

PSYC H IATRY
                                                             disorientation, agitation, hallucinations (usually visual), and severe
                                                             autonomic derangement. Pupils tend to be dilated and slow to react.
                                                             Seizures and DTs are considered major phenomena, although
                                                             seizures can occur with any level of withdrawal.

                What pharmacologic therapy is            The mainstays of therapy are the long-acting benzodiazepines, such as
                 expected to have been initiated in       diazepam or chlordiazepoxide, which control seizures with minimal
                 the emergency department?                respiratory or cardiac depression. Short-acting benzodiazepines,
                                                          including lorazepam and oxazepam are recommended for patients
                                                          with reduced liver function. The patient should also receive IV ﬂuids
                                                          and IV thiamine, folate, and magnesium sulfate to address probable
                                                          nutritional deﬁciencies. Administration of thiamine also prevents
                                                          Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome when given before glucose (which can
                                                          precipitate Wernicke’s encephalopathy).
                What is the pathophysiology of           Wernicke’s encephalopathy is an acute, usually reversible
                 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome?             encephalopathy characterized by the triad of delirium,
                                                          ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia; it results from acute thiamine depletion.
                                                          Korsakoff’s syndrome is due to chronic thiamine depletion, as from
                                                          long-term alcohol use, and is usually irreversible. It is marked by an
                                                          inability to learn new information, known as anterograde amnesia.

               404
 CASE 3                      An 18-year-old woman is being evaluated by her physician at the urging of her parents.
                              Her mother says she is concerned about her daughter’s dramatic weight loss over the
                              past year. The patient states that her mother is worrying over nothing, and that she
                              agreed to the doctor’s appointment just to get her off her back. She reports that she feels
                              just ﬁne, has been sleeping well, although her mood is “a little depressed.” She admits
                              she has not had her period in several months. She says she eats when she is hungry but
                              admits that she’s not hungry very often. She also says she is unhappy with her current
                              weight and would be happier if she just lost a few more pounds. She is an accomplished
                              ballet dancer and often spends hours in the evening dancing at the studio. She describes
                              her relationship with her mother as “very tense”; she feels like her mother is too
                              controlling. On physical examination, the patient is 173 cm (5′8″) tall; she weighs 46.7
                              kg (103 lb) and appears cachectic. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings reveal a WBC count of
                              4.5/mm3, hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dL, and a platelet count of 140/mm3.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?         Anorexia nervosa is diagnosed when a person:
                                              Induces weight loss leading to a body weight of < 85% of a healthy
                                               norm or refuses to gain appropriate weight when growing taller.
                                              Has an intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat even though
                                               underweight.
                                              Has a disturbance in the perception of his or her body shape.
                                              Has missed three consecutive menstrual cycles (in women).

                                             This patient’s body mass index is 15.7 kg/m2 (normal is 18.5–24.9
                                             kg/m2); a healthy weight for a female of her height and age is 60–68

                                                                                                                            PSYC H IATRY
                                             kg (approximately 131–151 lb).

 What steps are appropriate in the          This patient should be hospitalized, although it is unlikely she will
  approach to this patient?                  agree. Treatment should be aimed at restoring her nutritional status, as
                                             she is severely malnourished. Dehydration and electrolyte imbalances
                                             must be corrected. The patient should be weighed daily, and her daily
                                             ﬂuid intake and output should be monitored.
 Who should be included on her              The most accepted treatment for eating disorders, including anorexia
  treatment team?                            nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder, involves an
                                             interdisciplinary team approach. This team should include a medical
                                             provider, dietitian (with experience in treating eating disorders), and a
                                             mental health professional.
 What should be the focus of                Psychotherapy is the mainstay of treatment for eating disorders, as is
  psychotherapy?                             family involvement in therapy. Cognitive behavioral and supportive
                                             approaches help the patient work on underlying issues that may
                                             have initiated the eating disorder. A therapist with experience and
                                             expertise in the treatment of eating disorders is essential. Much of the
                                             psychological work will focus on the affective issues that surround the
                                             eating disorder rather than the eating behaviors. Issues of control and
                                             autonomy are often central.
 What is refeeding syndrome?                When previously malnourished patients are fed with high carbohydrate
                                             loads, a rapid fall in serum phosphate, magnesium, and potassium
                                             ensues along with an increase in extracellular ﬂuid volume. There is a
                                             subsequent increase in cardiac workload, with increased stroke volume,
                                             heart rate, and oxygen consumption. This sudden increase in demand
                                             for nutrients and oxygen may outstrip supply. Moreover, in patients
                                             with cardiovascular disease, the sudden increase in cardiac work and
                                             circulating ﬂuid can precipitate acute heart failure.

                                                                                                                    405
                CASE 4                         An 8-year-old boy is referred to his pediatrician at the recommendation of his teacher
                                                because of difﬁculties he has been having in school for the past year. According to
                                                the teacher, he is not completing assignments and often makes careless mistakes. He
                                                is easily distracted and must constantly be told to sit still and remain in his seat; he
                                                frequently is found staring out the window or talking to other students at their desks.
                                                She also says that he is very disruptive and blurts out answers to questions before she
                                                has completed them. He cannot seem to wait his turn in the cafeteria line and insists
                                                on playing games that others have not invited him to play. His parents describe him as
                                                a happy boy who enjoys playing with his brother and neighborhood friends. They have
                                                seen some of the same behaviors at home that are giving him trouble at school. They
                                                describe him as “constantly on the go” and describe the evenings as “a battle” to get
                                                him to ﬁnish his schoolwork or to clean his room, which is always a mess. He complains
                                                that he does not like school except for recess and physical education. Evaluation by the
                                                school counselor showed no evidence of a learning disorder.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?           Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), hyperactive and
                                                              impulsive type. He shows many of the traits of this disorder, including
                                                              ﬁdgeting that makes it difﬁcult for him to sit still in class, leaving his seat
                                                              inappropriately, talking excessively, and being constantly “on the go.”

                What are the different                        Hyperactive and impulsive type: see above.
                 classiﬁcations of this condition?             Inattentive type: This type affects girls more frequently than boys.
                                                                The chief symptoms include: difﬁculty following instructions, paying
                                                                attention, organizing tasks, and forgetfulness. These children tend to

PSYC H IATRY
                                                                be less disruptive, and thus are often more difﬁcult to diagnose than
                                                                their hyperactive-impulsive counterparts.
                                                               Combined type: Displays at least six inattentive symptoms and at
                                                                least six hyperactive symptoms.
                                                              Also note that the symptoms of ADHD must be present for at least
                                                              6 months and observable in two or more settings. Some of the
                                                              symptoms must be present before age 7.
                What is the epidemiology of the              It is common in school-aged children, with estimates of its prevalence
                 disorder?                                    ranging from 3–10% of youths. It is three times more common in boys
                                                              than in girls.
                Is this strictly a childhood                 Although it was originally classiﬁed as a childhood disorder, increasing
                 condition?                                   numbers of adults have also been diagnosed with ADHD. There is
                                                              concern about overdiagnosis, however, because of the risks of substance
                                                              abuse (see below) and a propensity for secondary gain (this diagnosis
                                                              is regarded as a disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act).
                                                              An adult cannot be diagnosed with ADHD without evidence of the
                                                              disorder in childhood.
                What imaging abnormalities have              Quantitative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have shown
                 been noted in patients with this             that the prefrontal cortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum are either
                 condition?                                   smaller or asymmetric in ADHD. These ﬁndings correlate well with
                                                              neuropsychological data, which indicate that those with ADHD
                                                              have trouble with the following two functions: response inhibition
                                                              (executive functions mediated by the prefrontal cortex) and timing
                                                              functions (mediated by the cerebellum).
                What is the most appropriate                 The recommended treatment is a psychostimulant. Methylphenidate is
                 treatment for this condition?                usually the ﬁrst line of treatment, followed by D-amphetamine. If these
                                                              are not successful, amoxetine (a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor),
                                                              tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine), or bupropion may be used.

               406
 CASE 5                      The parents of a 28-month-old boy present to their pediatrician expressing concern
                              about his development. Until age 2, their son had met all his developmental
                              milestones; he was able to follow simple directions, respond to his name, and speak
                              8–10 words. However, over the past 4 months, their son has progressively become more
                              withdrawn. He rarely makes eye contact and does not respond to his parents’ laughter
                              or affectionate gestures. He does not play with other children his age and frequently
                              rocks back and forth. Of most concern to his parents, he rarely speaks and often does
                              not respond to his name. He does not compensate for his lack of speech through other
                              communication, such as miming or gesturing.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Autistic disorder, regressive type. Children with the regressive form
                                            of autism show relatively normal development from 12 to 24 months
                                            of age but subsequently lose the skills they have previously obtained.
                                            According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
                                            Disorders, 4th ed., Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), a patient must exhibit
                                            impairments in all of the following:
                                             Qualitative impairment in social interaction.
                                             Qualitative impairment in communication.
                                             Restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behavior.

                                            This patient most likely meets the criteria for autism; he is showing
                                            marked impairment in the use of nonverbal behavior (i.e., eye-to-
                                            eye gaze), does not attempt to develop peer relationships, and lacks
                                            social/emotional reciprocity. He also has stopped speaking, with no

                                                                                                                       PSYC H IATRY
                                            accompanying compensation mechanism, and engages in repetitive
                                            motor movements. Autism affects boys about four times more
                                            frequently than girls and occurs in approximately 6 per 10,000 people.
                                            Genetic factors seem to be contributory; autism is seen more frequently
                                            in identical twins than fraternal twins.

 What conditions should be                 Autism is a pervasive developmental disorder (PDD), and other
  included in the differential              conditions in this class must be ruled out to conﬁrm the diagnosis.
  diagnosis?                                 Rett’s disorder occurs almost exclusively in girls; children afﬂicted
                                              develop relatively normally until 6–18 months of age, then
                                              subsequently exhibit many of the symptoms common to autism.
                                              Many children with Rett’s also experience a deceleration in head
                                              growth, resulting in microcephaly in some patients. Gastrointestinal
                                              problems, seizures, and scoliosis are all common.
                                             Asperger’s disorder is a form of “high functioning” autism and usually
                                              is not diagnosed until later in life, typically once a child enters
                                              school. While these patients show impairment in social interaction
                                              and restricted, repetitive motor movements, they do not show a
                                              clinically signiﬁcant delay in language, as autistic children do.
                                             A hearing disorder should also be ruled out; however, children with
                                              hearing difﬁculties will normally try to compensate through mimes
                                              and gestures.
 What other conditions are                 Approximately half of autistic children are mentally retarded, and
  associated with this condition?           seizures occur in about one-third. Medical conditions or syndromes
                                            associated with autism include phenylketonuria, fragile X syndrome,
                                            Angelman syndrome, and fetal alcohol syndrome, but these disorders
                                            are usually diagnosed well before 2–3 years of age.
 What is the most appropriate              Patients with autism do best in structured educational and social
  treatment for this condition?             programs. Risperidone may be indicated for children ages 5–16 years to
                                            address the irritability and aggression associated with autism.

                                                                                                               407
                CASE 6                    A 19-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for a routine examination.
                                           She denies any complaints at present. The patient is 160 cm (5′3″) tall and weighs 52
                                           kg (115 lb). Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F), pulse of
                                           82/min, and blood pressure of 118/70 mm Hg. The patient is also noted to have some
                                           dental enamel erosion, slightly enlarged parotid glands bilaterally, and scarring over her
                                           right second and third metacarpophalangeal joints. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as
                                           follows:
                                           Na+: 135 mEq/L
                                           K+: 2.8 mEq/L
                                           Cl–: 96 mEq/L
                                           HCO3–: 33 mEq/L
                                           Serum amylase: 130 U/L

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Bulimia nervosa. This condition is characterized by frequent
                                                          episodes of binge eating associated with emotional distress and a
                                                          sense of lack of control over eating. This distress is accompanied
                                                          by compensatory behaviors aimed at preventing weight gain. Such
                                                          compensatory behaviors must occur at least two times per week for
                                                          more than 3 months and often include purging, fasting, misuse of
                                                          diuretics/laxatives, or intense exercise after eating. Bulimia must
                                                          be distinguished from an occurrence of anorexia nervosa, purging
                                                          type. However, bulimic patients often have a normal body weight, in
                                                          contrast to patients with anorexia nervosa, and conceal their behaviors

PSYC H IATRY
                                                          from family and friends.

                What is the epidemiology of this         Bulimia nervosa is primarily a disorder of adolescent girls and young
                 condition?                               women. Prevalence may be as high as 5–10% of college-age women.
                                                          This condition is much more common in females than in males.
                How is this condition classiﬁed?          Purging type—patients vomit and use diuretics or cathartics.
                                                           Nonpurging type—patients restrict calories or exercise.

                What other symptoms are                  Individuals with bulimia nervosa have an increased frequency of mood
                 common in patients with this             and anxiety symptoms. They also have an increased frequency of
                 condition?                               personality disorders and substance abuse. Symptoms of impulsivity are
                                                          also common.
                What are the medical                      Chronic sore throat, esophagitis, or Boerhaave’s syndrome.
                 complications associated with this        Dental erosion and caries.
                 condition?                                Gastric dilatation and rupture.
                                                           Menstrual irregularities.
                                                           Parotid gland swelling.
                                                           Pancreatitis.

                What are the typical laboratory          Frequent purging can produce electrolyte abnormalities, most
                 ﬁndings in this condition?               commonly hypokalemia, hyponatremia, and hypochloremia. The
                                                          loss of stomach acid through vomiting may result in a metabolic
                                                          alkalosis with elevated serum bicarbonate. Laxative abuse may cause a
                                                          metabolic acidosis. Additionally, serum amylase may be elevated.

               408
 What is the most appropriate    Individual psychotherapy is recommended, particularly focusing on
  treatment for this condition?   behavior modiﬁcation and body image. The symptoms of bulimia
                                  nervosa are responsive to antidepressants, particularly selective
                                  serotonin reuptake inhibitors; however, other classes of antidepressants
                                  have also been shown to be effective. Notably, bupropion is
                                  contraindicated in patients with bulimia nervosa, as it has been
                                  associated with an increased incidence of seizures.

                                                                                                             PSYC H IATRY

                                                                                                      409
                CASE 7                     A 26-year-old G7P3 woman at 34 weeks’ gestation presents to the emergency
                                            department because she feels she is beginning to experience contractions and does not
                                            have an outpatient obstetrician. On examination, her pupils are dilated and she appears
                                            agitated and nervous. She then changes her mind and says she does not want further
                                            evaluation because it has been too long since her last “smoke.” She is adamant about
                                            needing to leave right away. Upon further questioning, she states that if she does not get
                                            to smoke soon, she will become very sleepy and depressed and will have intense food
                                            cravings. She has been in inpatient drug rehabilitation twice but always relapses back
                                            to her drug of choice. She is currently living at a halfway house, is on welfare, and does
                                            not have custody of any of her three children. “They will probably take this one away
                                            from me, too,” she adds as she begins to cry. She says she used to be able to get high for
                                            $10 per day, but now it costs up to $100 per day. She affords her habit by trading drugs
                                            and money for sex; she cannot recall if she has been tested for HIV or other sexually
                                            transmitted diseases.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Cocaine dependence. This patient exhibits the classic signs of
                                                          addiction: she has tolerance for the drug (requires more to achieve the
                                                          same effect) and experiences withdrawal symptoms without it. She
                                                          has continued to use cocaine despite negative consequences, and she
                                                          has been unable to stop despite repeated attempts. Smoking cocaine
                                                          results in feelings of euphoria and heightened energy, while depression,
                                                          hunger, and sleepiness are symptoms of withdrawal.

                What behavioral changes are              Behavioral changes may include:

PSYC H IATRY
                 associated with use of this drug?         Blunting of feelings.
                                                           Decreased appetite.
                                                           Euphoria and increased energy.
                                                           Heightened anxiety, irritability, or anger.
                                                           Hypervigilance and heightened alertness.
                                                           Impaired judgment.
                                                           Increase in sexual excitement and spontaneous ejaculation.
                                                           Increased risk for psychosis.
                                                           Increased self-conﬁdence.

                What physical changes are                Physical changes may include:
                 associated with use of this drug?         Chest pain and/or arrhythmias due to vasospasm in coronary arteries.
                                                           Confusion, seizures, stupor, or coma.
                                                           Diaphoresis or chills.
                                                           Dilated pupils.
                                                           Increased pulse and blood pressure due to vasoconstriction.
                                                           Muscle weakness, dystonia, or dyskinesia.
                                                           Nausea or vomiting.
                                                           Psychomotor slowing or agitation.
                                                           Respiratory depression.
                                                           Weight loss.

               410
 What are the risks to this patient’s   Cocaine readily crosses the placenta and is metabolized slowly by the
  unborn child?                          fetus; thus, the fetus can be exposed to high levels of cocaine for long
                                         periods. Because of its vasoconstrictive properties, cocaine use increases
                                         the risk of fetal hypoxia and abruptio placentae.
                                         Other risks include premature birth, lower birth weight, respiratory
                                         distress, bowel infarctions, cerebral infarctions, reduced head
                                         circumference, and increased risk of seizures. Behaviorally, these
                                         newborns show an increased degree of tremulousness, crying, and
                                         irritability and are overreactive to environmental stimuli; the behaviors
                                         decrease in the ﬁrst month of life but never to normal levels. Cocaine
                                         can be found in breast milk up to 60 hours after the last use.

                                                                                                                      PSYC H IATRY

                                                                                                              411
                CASE 8                     A 13-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his mother, who is concerned about
                                            his behavior. Over the past year, he has been suspended from school three times, once
                                            for ﬁghting with another student and twice for stealing. His mother has also begun
                                            receiving calls from the local truancy ofﬁcer, reporting her son’s repeated absences from
                                            school. He was recently arrested by the police for breaking into a neighbor’s car. He
                                            previously had a normal developmental course.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Conduct disorder. Conduct disorder is a persistent pattern of behavior
                                                          in children and adolescents, in which the rights of others or age-
                                                          appropriate social norms are violated. These behavior patterns can
                                                          be seen in a variety of settings—at home, at school, and in social
                                                          situations. Conduct disorder is more common in boys, with studies
                                                          indicating that the rate among boys in the general population ranges
                                                          from 6% to 16%.

                What conditions should be                Notably, oppositional deﬁant disorder must be considered.
                 included in the differential             Oppositional deﬁant disorder is a pattern of negativistic, hostile, and
                 diagnosis?                               deﬁant behavior toward ﬁgures of authority lasting at least 6 months.
                                                          The inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity of attention-deﬁcit/
                                                          hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be mistaken as oppositional
                                                          behavior. Finally, the irritability and impulsivity associated with
                                                          childhood bipolar disorder can also result in disruptive behaviors.
                What are the signs and symptoms           Aggressive behavior that threatens or harms people or animals such as
                 of this condition?                         bullying or intimidating others, initiating physical ﬁghts, or abusing

PSYC H IATRY
                                                            animals.
                                                           Deceitfulness or theft, such as breaking into someone’s house or car,
                                                            or lying or “conning” others.
                                                           Nonaggressive conduct that causes property loss or damage (i.e.,
                                                            vandalism or ﬁre-setting).
                                                           Serious rule violations like running away from home overnight or
                                                            school truancy.
                                                           At least three or more of the above must be present within the last 12
                                                            months, with at least one criterion present within the last 6 months.
                What other problems are                  Conduct disorder may also be associated with other difﬁculties,
                 associated with this condition?          such as substance use, risk-taking behavior, school problems, and
                                                          physical injury from accidents or ﬁghts. Conduct disorder also tends
                                                          to occur with a number of other emotional and behavioral disorders
                                                          of childhood, particularly ADHD, anxiety disorders, and affective
                                                          disorders.
                What is the most appropriate             The mainstay of treatment for conduct disorder is behavioral therapy,
                 treatment for this condition?            although pharmacotherapy can be used adjunctively to target
                                                          symptoms such as aggression, agitation, and impulsivity.
                What is the prognosis for patients       Most children and adolescents with conduct disorder do not grow up to
                 with this condition?                     have behavioral problems or problems with the law. However, conduct
                                                          disorder in childhood and adolescence has been associated with
                                                          antisocial personality disorder in adults.

               412
 CASE 9                     An 86-year-old woman is admitted to the intensive care unit after suffering a myocardial
                             infarction. Despite her advanced age, she has no known previous medical history. Her
                             son, who is her primary caregiver, is very concerned about her condition and insists
                             on remaining at her bedside at all times. Shortly after midnight, she becomes agitated
                             and removes her intravenous line. As the nursing staff attempts to replace the line and
                             calm her, she begins screaming, “I have to clean the kitchen!” She does not appear to
                             recognize her son. Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F),
                             pulse of 101/min, and blood pressure of 132/84 mm Hg. Oxygen saturation is 98%, and
                             blood glucose is 103 mg/dL.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Delirium. Delirium is a transient disturbance of consciousness with
                                            marked impairment in attention that develops over hours to days and
                                            waxes and wanes with time. Hospitalized patients, particularly those
                                            recovering from brain injuries, burns, or cardiac procedures, are
                                            especially susceptible to episodes of delirium.
                                            Delirium is often mistaken for dementia, depression, acute
                                            schizophrenia, or a disorder related to the patient’s old age, as many of
                                            the patients presenting with delirium are elderly.

 What are the signs and symptoms           Delirium presents acutely as a disturbance in consciousness marked
  of this condition?                        by impaired attention with cognitive and perceptual abnormalities.
                                            Delirium tends to have a waxing and waning course and may
                                            be characterized by anxiety, paranoia, or combativeness. Other
                                            characteristics include reversed sleep-wake cycles and worsening of

                                                                                                                        PSYC H IATRY
                                            symptoms at night.
 What is the etiology of this              Delirium most often results from a variety of general medical
  condition?                                conditions or from substances that interfere with brain function. Some
                                            of these conditions include:
                                             Exogenous toxic agents: stimulants, lysergic acid diethylamide
                                              (LSD).
                                             Primary intracranial disease: vasculitis, stroke, seizure.
                                             Systemic disease secondarily affecting the brain: infection, cardiac
                                              events, metabolic disturbances, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia,
                                              vitamin deﬁciencies.
                                             Withdrawal from substances of abuse.

 What tests could be used to               If delirium is suspected in a hospitalized patient, a vigorous search
  conﬁrm the diagnosis?                     for an underlying medical etiology should be undertaken. Vital signs
                                            and pulse oximetry should be reviewed. Recent medications and
                                            medication changes, substance use patterns, and nutritional status
                                            should also be considered. Laboratory and radiological studies should
                                            be ordered to rule out infection, toxic-metabolic causes, or intracranial
                                            pathology.
 What is the most appropriate              In addition to treating the underlying medical etiology, treatment for
  treatment for this condition?             delirium includes both pharmacologic and supportive approaches.
                                            Quiet, well-lighted surroundings, as well as frequent orientation, can
                                            minimize patient agitation. Agitated patients may become suicidal
                                            or homicidal and should not be left alone. The use of physical
                                            restraints or low-dose antipsychotic medications may be indicated.
                                            Benzodiazepines should be avoided, as they may worsen delirium-
                                            associated confusion. Neuroleptics such as haloperidol or risperidone
                                            are also helpful.

                                                                                                                 413
                CASE 10                       A 64-year-old man presents to the emergency department disoriented and confused.
                                               Airport security brought him into the hospital after he repeatedly accosted strangers
                                               in the airport, asking them his name and expressing confusion as to why he was there.
                                               The patient’s physical examination is within normal limits, except for minor bruising
                                               on his legs, which he says was a result of a fall earlier in the day. When asked his name,
                                               the man replies, “I don’t know.” Flight records indicate that the patient ﬂew from a city
                                               hundreds of miles away approximately a day ago and also conﬁrm his identity. When
                                               family members are contacted, they indicate that the patient’s wife died about 2 weeks
                                               ago, and the patient has also had some ongoing ﬁnancial problems. Family members
                                               have been unable to reach him for the past several days. They indicate that he is not
                                               on any medications and that, while he had grieved his wife’s death, he had appeared
                                               to be recovering well the last time they saw him. Medical evaluation including routine
                                               laboratory studies and a head CT is unrevealing.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?           The most likely diagnosis is dissociative fugue. According to the
                                                              Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed., Text
                                                              Revision (DSM-IV-TR), the predominant disturbance in dissociative
                                                              fugue is sudden, unexpected travel away from home, coupled with
                                                              confusion about personal identity or assumption of a new identity.
                                                              Fugues may last from hours to months. Many patients exhibit only
                                                              mild confusion during the fugue, and it is only after they emerge from
                                                              the fugue that they panic or are disoriented, with limited recollection
                                                              of events. Dissociative fugue is one of four dissociative disorders; the
                                                              other three are dissociative amnesia, dissociative identity disorder

PSYC H IATRY
                                                              (DID), and depersonalization disorder. Fugue is differentiated from
                                                              dissociative amnesia by the sudden (and often extensive) travel
                                                              undertaken by fugue patients. Patients with DID, although amnestic
                                                              about certain events, do not claim to be confused about their identity;
                                                              they simply assume multiple identities.

                What conditions should be                    By deﬁnition, a patient’s disturbance during dissociative fugue cannot
                 included in the differential                 be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general
                 diagnosis?                                   medical condition. Due to this patient’s age and history, dementia and
                                                              head trauma should both be ruled out. Although this patient is not on
                                                              any prescribed medications, the physician should also screen for any
                                                              substances the patient might have ingested to trigger this condition.
                                                              The physician should also attempt to ascertain whether the patient is
                                                              malingering; most fugues are a result of an unbearable trauma such
                                                              as war, natural disasters, and childhood abuse. The patient, therefore,
                                                              may attempt to absolve himself of accountability or otherwise remove
                                                              himself from a hazardous situation by assuming a new identity.
                                                              Other disorders that must be ruled out include bipolar disorder,
                                                              schizophrenia, early symptoms of other neurological disorders such as
                                                              multiple sclerosis, or a seizure disorder.
                What is the most appropriate                 The goal of this patient’s treatment should be to help him cope with
                 treatment for this patient?                  the stress or trauma that originally triggered the fugue. The patient is
                                                              likely suffering from depression, and appropriate psychotherapy and
                                                              medication relating to that diagnosis should be prescribed. Family
                                                              therapy may also be helpful, in order to teach family members about
                                                              the disorder and how they might recognize future occurrences.

               414
 CASE 11                   A 32-year-old pregnant woman with a history of drug abuse and depression presents to
                            the emergency department for evaluation of a sprained wrist. On physical examination,
                            several bruises in various stages of healing are noted on her torso and upper extremities.
                            The cause of her injuries is unclear, because she initially says that she slipped and fell
                            against a table; the appearance and distribution of her bruises are not consistent with
                            her story. She seems uncomfortable when pressed further for clariﬁcation and changes
                            the details several times.

 What is the most likely cause of         Physical abuse, speciﬁcally intimate partner violence (IPV). The
  her injury?                              following should lead a physician to suspect an abusive relationship:
                                            An inconsistent explanation of injuries or a delay in seeking
                                             treatment is often the ﬁrst clue.
                                            Frequent emergency room visits are also common with victims
                                             of abuse. Abusers may permit emergency room visits (as opposed
                                             to a primary care physician’s ofﬁce), where there is a lower risk of
                                             continuity of care and thus less of a chance for arousal of suspicion of
                                             abuse.
                                            Gynecologic conditions that are seen more frequently in abused
                                             patients include premenstrual syndrome, sexually transmitted
                                             diseases, unintended pregnancy, and chronic pelvic pain. Abused
                                             women may have frequent abortions because of repeated sexual
                                             assaults and the inability to use birth control.
                                            Poor follow-up is frequent because abusers will not let their victims
                                             come to the ofﬁce or may take medications away as a means of

                                                                                                                         PSYC H IATRY
                                             retaliation.
                                            Psychiatric disorders that are seen more frequently in abused patients
                                             include substance abuse, anxiety, depression, and eating disorders.
                                            Victims of abuse often present with somatic complaints like chronic
                                             abdominal pain, headaches, and fatigue.

 What is the epidemiology of this         Women of all ages, socioeconomic classes, and ethnicities are victims
  condition?                               of IPV, deﬁned as either physical or sexual abuse. It is estimated that,
                                           in the United States, over 1.5 million women and 800,000 men are
                                           victims of abuse each year. Between 14% and 18% of couples reported
                                           episodes of physical violence in the previous year. Women who are
                                           pregnant or in the postpartum period are at increased risk of abuse.
                                           Abused pregnant women have a threefold increased risk of being
                                           victims of attempted or completed homicide than nonabused women
                                           with similar demographics.
 What is the best approach to             The Massachusetts Medical Society Committee on Violence
  the patient in whom abuse is             recommends asking one question that can be adapted as needed: “At
  suspected?                               any time, has a partner hit, kicked, or otherwise hurt or threatened
                                           you?” This one question has been found to signiﬁcantly increase the
                                           detection rate of partner violence. It is also important to assess whether
                                           the patient has a safe place to go if she is being abused. A physician
                                           should have ready access to appropriate resources for patients in
                                           abusive relationships.

                                                                                                                  415
                CASE 12                     A 24-year-old nursing student presents to the emergency department (ED) after
                                             a syncopal episode. She was studying with a friend but took a break to go to the
                                             bathroom; when she returned, she complained of light-headedness and was diaphoretic.
                                             The friend states she then slumped over on the desk, unresponsive, so he called 911.
                                             Fingerstick blood glucose en route was 24 mg/dL, and she was revived with glucose.
                                             She describes multiple similar episodes, for which she has undergone an extensive
                                             workup without diagnosis. She is reluctant to give the names of any of her former
                                             providers. Physical examination is within normal limits. A C-peptide level is low.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Munchausen’s syndrome. This is a form of factitious disorder, in which
                                                           patients injure themselves or fabricate symptoms for primary gain (the
                                                           sympathy and attention given to the sick). In Munchausen’s syndrome,
                                                           patients will fabricate physical symptoms (not those of a mental
                                                           illness); it is more common among health care workers. In this case,
                                                           the patient’s symptoms are due to surreptitious injection of insulin,
                                                           resulting in hypoglycemia.

                What is the C-peptide level?              C-peptide is a by-product of endogenous insulin production from
                                                           the cleavage of proinsulin into insulin. It is not present in exogenous
                                                           sources of insulin. In this case, the low levels of C-peptide suggest that
                                                           the patient received exogenous insulin supplies (thus reducing clinical
                                                           suspicion for an insulinoma or other pathology).
                What other conditions must be             Hypochondriasis is a somatoform disorder in which the patient is
                 considered?                               convinced she has a speciﬁc disease, despite reassurance from medical

PSYC H IATRY
                                                           providers. The patient may complain of physical symptoms (e.g., chest
                                                           pain); however, she does not have conscious control over the symptoms
                                                           and does not take measures to create these symptoms, unlike in a
                                                           factitious disorder. Malingering is similar to factitious disorder, in that
                                                           patients intentionally create or feign their symptoms. The motivation
                                                           in malingering, however, is secondary gain, such as ﬁnancial beneﬁts.
                What are the ﬁve types of                 Somatoform disorders are those in which the patients have no
                 somatoform disorders?                     conscious control over their unexplained somatic symptoms. There are
                                                           ﬁve types:
                                                            Somatization disorder: multiple chronic complaints from a variety of
                                                             organ systems.
                                                            Conversion disorder: motor or sensory losses that are incompatible
                                                             with a neurologic process and are closely related to a stressful event.
                                                            Hypochondriasis: preoccupation with a speciﬁc disease.
                                                            Body dysmorphic disorder: preoccupation with an imagined physical
                                                             defect; typically seen in dermatology and plastic surgery ofﬁces.
                                                            Pain disorder: pain symptoms inconsistent with a physiologic
                                                             process; frequently associated with depression.
                What is the most appropriate              While patients with Munchausen’s syndrome are eager to seek
                 treatment for this condition?             treatment for their fabricated medical conditions, they are typically
                                                           very unwilling to accept or be treated for their underlying diagnosis.
                                                           Psychotherapy is the mainstay of treatment, which focuses on
                                                           uncovering the psychological basis of the disorder. Family therapy may
                                                           also be helpful, if the family is reinforcing the behavior by encouraging
                                                           the sick role. Prognosis for these patients is generally poor; efforts
                                                           should be made to protect them by preventing unnecessary medical
                                                           procedures.

               416
 CASE 13                    A 42-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with a chief complaint of
                             insomnia. He states he is able to fall asleep quickly but wakes up in the middle of the
                             night and is unable to get back to sleep. He lies in bed worrying about his job as an
                             accountant in a large ﬁrm, the health of his aging parents, the country’s involvement
                             in wars overseas, the encroachment of gangs in his city, and any number of seemingly
                             random, unrelated topics. He complains of frequent tension headaches and does not
                             feel like he is ever “really relaxed.” He reports occasionally feeling short of breath and
                             experiences heart palpitations. He is concerned because his restlessness is affecting his
                             ability to concentrate at work, and they are heading into the busiest time of year. He says
                             he has felt this way for most of his adult life but that his symptoms seem to be getting
                             worse. The only thing that seems to help is if he has a few drinks after work, but he does
                             not want to become dependent on alcohol to ease his nerves.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        This patient meets several of the DSM-IV-TR criteria for generalized
                                            anxiety disorder (GAD). This disorder is characterized by excessive
                                            worry and anxiety that is difﬁcult for the patient to control. The focus
                                            of the worry is broad and includes issues regarding the patient’s or
                                            others’ health, life circumstances, ﬁnances, job performance, and more
                                            global issues. The criteria require that at least three of the following six
                                            symptoms be present for more days than not over a period of 6 months:
                                            restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge, easy fatigability, difﬁculty
                                            concentrating, irritability, muscle tension, and sleep disturbance.

 What is the epidemiology of this          GAD is common in the general population, with estimates of lifetime

                                                                                                                           PSYC H IATRY
  condition?                                prevalence ranging from 4% to 7%. Women, African Americans,
                                            and persons under 30 are most likely to be affected; persons at any
                                            age, however, may develop the disorder. It is regarded as a chronic
                                            condition that worsens with life stressors and with the occurrence
                                            of negative life events. Few patients seek help to directly address
                                            the anxiety; most will consult their physicians regarding somatic
                                            complaints associated with the disorder.
 What conditions should be                 GAD often coexists with other mental disorders, especially phobias
  included in the differential              (speciﬁc and social), dysthymic disorder, depressive disorders, panic
  diagnosis?                                disorder, and substance abuse disorders. It is important to distinguish
                                            GAD from other anxiety disorders, depression with comorbid anxiety,
                                            and anxiety secondary to medical conditions, substance use, or that
                                            occurring excusively during posttraumatic stress disorder. Social phobia
                                            is characterized by a fear of being humiliated publicly and a fear of
                                            social or performance situations. Panic attacks are discrete occurrences
                                            of intense fear; depression with comorbid anxiety has a predominating
                                            depressive nature. A careful history will differentiate substance
                                            intoxication (notably cocaine or amphetamines) or alcohol withdrawal
                                            symptoms from GAD.
 What is the most appropriate              Newer antidepressants, including the selective serotonin reuptake
  treatment for this condition?             inhibitors and an extended-release form of the antidepressant
                                            venlafaxine, have proven successful and are now considered ﬁrst-line
                                            therapies for GAD. Buspirone, a nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic, is also
                                            effective. Benzodiazepines have also been used with success but must
                                            be closely monitored due to their abuse potential. Given the chronic
                                            nature of this condition, patients should be advised that the treatment
                                            course will be at least 6–12 months and may be needed indeﬁnitely.

                                                                                                                   417
                CASE 14                       An 81-year-old man is brought to his geriatrician by his daughter because she is
                                               concerned about his recent behavior. She says he has been crying frequently and not
                                               eating well. The patient admits that he has been feeling despondent lately and has told
                                               his children he no longer wishes to be a burden to them and that they would be better
                                               off if he weren’t around anymore. Prior to the past few weeks, he was still active and
                                               played poker regularly with other men in his retirement community. He says he “has
                                               not been up to it” for the past 2 weeks and ﬁnds himself sleeping throughout the day.
                                               The patient denies experiencing manic symptoms or auditory or visual hallucinations.
                                               The results of his physical examination are essentially normal, although he has lost 4.5
                                               kg (10 lb) since his last visit and exhibits psychomotor slowing. His medications include
                                               an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a thiazide diuretic, neither of which
                                               were prescribed recently.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?           This patient is showing signs and symptoms of major depression
                                                              (decreased energy, hypersomnia, anhedonia, crying spells, suicidal
                                                              ideation, anorexia with weight loss, guilt, and psychomotor
                                                              retardation). A useful mnemonic for the criteria for major depression is
                                                              SIG E CAPS:
                                                              S: sleep changes
                                                              I: (decreased) interest
                                                              G: (excessive) guilt
                                                              E: (decreased) energy
                                                              C: (poor) concentration

PSYC H IATRY
                                                              A: appetite changes
                                                              P: psychomotor agitation or retardation
                                                              S: suicidal ideation
                                                              Five or more of the above symptoms must be present during the same
                                                              2-week period, with at least one of the symptoms being either depressed
                                                              mood or anhedonia.

                What further workup ought to be              This patient has expressed thoughts of death. The treating physician
                 pursued?                                     must assess the scope of this patient’s intentions (e.g., does he have a
                                                              plan, does he have access to a weapon, etc.). Suicide rates among the
                                                              geriatric population, especially among elderly Caucasian males, are
                                                              increasing. In addition, older adults who are divorced or widowed are at
                                                              higher risk for suicide than those who are married. Close observation in
                                                              the hospital while treatment is being initiated would be warranted if he
                                                              intends to harm himself.
                What treatment options are                   The treatment options are the same as those for younger patients.
                 available for this patient?                  They include the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, monoamine
                                                              oxidase inhibitors, atypical antidepressants, tricyclic antidepressants,
                                                              electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), and psychotherapy. Because
                                                              older patients have decreased metabolism and clearance rates,
                                                              they may require smaller doses to achieve a therapeutic effect. As
                                                              a rule of thumb, one should “start low and go slow” when titrating
                                                              antidepressants in this population. Orthostasis and anticholinergic
                                                              symptoms are more frequently reported because of increased sensitivity
                                                              to side effects in elderly patients. It is also important to be aware
                                                              of potential drug-drug interactions because of the prevalence of
                                                              polypharmacy in the geriatric population.

               418
 What is the role of ECT in the   ECT is a treatment that involves the induction of generalized seizures
  treatment of this condition?     by passing an electric current through the brain. It is thought that
                                   seizure induction releases chemicals such as serotonin and dopamine
                                   in the brain, thus creating an effect similar to that of antidepressant
                                   medication. It is one of the safest and most effective treatments
                                   available for depression, especially for elderly patients who cannot
                                   tolerate antidepressants or in cases where their use is contraindicated.
                                   Furthermore, the mood-enhancing effect of ECT is faster than that
                                   seen with antidepressants.

                                                                                                              PSYC H IATRY

                                                                                                        419
                CASE 15                      A 31-year-old man has decided to seek treatment from a psychiatrist through his
                                              employee assistance program because he feels that his drinking is jeopardizing his
                                              work and that he might be ﬁred if he does not quit. He states that his job as a computer
                                              programmer is “okay” because he can keep to himself and not be bothered by his
                                              coworkers. During the interview, he reveals that he lives alone and has never had
                                              a girlfriend. He states that he does not miss having sex and that masturbation and
                                              computer pornography satisfy his sexual needs. He speaks to his brother frequently but
                                              has not seen other members of his family in quite some time; he shows little interest
                                              or affection in describing his relationship with them. He says that most nights he stays
                                              home surﬁng the Internet, playing computer games, or watching TV, and drinking up
                                              to a 12-pack of beer per night. He also smokes marijuana 4–5 times per week. On a
                                              mental status examination, he appears detached and aloof toward the psychiatrist. He
                                              reports his mood as “a little depressed”; his affect is congruent, and his range is ﬂat. No
                                              other disorders are noted on examination.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?          Schizoid personality disorder. He meets the following Diagnostic and
                                                             Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed., Text Revision (DSM-
                                                             IV-TR) criteria for this diagnosis:
                                                              Neither desires nor enjoys close relationships, including being part of
                                                               a family.
                                                              Almost always chooses solitary activities.
                                                              Little, if any, interest in having sexual experiences.
                                                              Takes pleasure in few, if any, activities.
                                                              Lacks close friends or conﬁdants other than ﬁrst-degree relatives.

PSYC H IATRY
                                                              Shows emotional detachment and a ﬂat affect.

                                                             Another criterion for this diagnosis is that patients may appear
                                                             indifferent to the praise or criticism of others. This disorder is included
                                                             with the Cluster A personality disorders in the DSM-IV-TR, along with
                                                             schizotypal and paranoid personality disorders.

                What conditions should be                   Schizophrenia, a mood disorder with psychotic features; avoidant
                 included in the differential                personality disorder, another psychotic disorder; and a pervasive
                 diagnosis?                                  developmental disorder are all included in the differential diagnosis.
                                                             Effects of a general medical condition must be ruled out as well. Note
                                                             that individuals with avoidant personality disorder typically express
                                                             a desire for interpersonal relationships, unlike those with schizoid
                                                             personality disorder.
                How is schizotypal personality              Although both disorders are marked by social and emotional
                 disorder differentiated from this           detachment, schizotypal personality disorder more closely mimics
                 condition?                                  schizophrenia, even though most patients with schizotypal personality
                                                             disorder do not ultimately develop schizophrenia. Patients often display
                                                             odd behavior and unconventional beliefs (i.e., beliefs in clairvoyance,
                                                             telepathy, or other superstitions inconsistent with subcultural norms).
                What other traits are typically             Patients with this disorder have a profound defect in the ability to form
                 seen in patients with this                  personal relationships and to make intimate attachments. They are
                 condition?                                  unable to respond to others in a meaningful way and do not appear
                                                             to be disturbed by this fact. These patients are not often seen in the
                                                             clinical setting because they rarely seek professional help unless there
                                                             is another disorder present such as depression, anxiety, or substance
                                                             abuse.

               420
 What treatment approach would   These patients usually lack the insight or motivation to pursue
 be best for this patient?        individual therapy in order to address the underlying disorder, and a
                                  group therapy setting would likely prove too threatening. Therefore,
                                  this patient would beneﬁt most from addressing his substance abuse
                                  issues.

                                                                                                            PSYC H IATRY

                                                                                                      421
                CASE 16                    A 35-year-old homeless man is admitted to the medical ward for treatment of an acute
                                            asthma exacerbation. He has a medical history signiﬁcant for chronic severe asthma
                                            with multiple hospital admissions, as well as tobacco use, heroin abuse, hypertension,
                                            and chronic, untreated tinea corporis infection. He is on his third day of supportive
                                            treatment with nebulized albuterol, metered-dose inhaled ﬂuticasone, and an oral
                                            prednisone taper when he develops nausea, vomiting, and nonbloody diarrhea. He
                                            denies chest pain, palpitations, shortness of breath, dizziness, abdominal pain, fevers, or
                                            chills. His vital signs are within normal limits, and he has teary eyes with dilated pupils;
                                            he is yawning and sneezing intermittently.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?        This constellation of signs and symptoms most likely represents opioid
                                                           withdrawal. Pupillary dilation, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, yawning,
                                                           piloerection, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are the most common
                                                           signs and symptoms of acute opioid withdrawal. Given his history
                                                           of heroin use, it is likely that the patient was actively using heroin
                                                           immediately prior to his hospitalization.

                What is the epidemiology of this          Approximately 2.4 million people have used heroin in the United
                 condition?                                States, as reported in the 1998 National Household Survey on Drug
                                                           Abuse. Heroin-related emergency department visits more than doubled
                                                           between 1990 and 1996 to approximately 70,000, according to the U.S.
                                                           Department of Health and Human Services.
                What factors determine the                The time of onset, severity of symptoms, and duration of symptoms
                 severity and duration of this             are directly related to the pharmacokinetics of the particular opioid

PSYC H IATRY
                 condition?                                involved. Of the most commonly abused opioids, heroin has an earlier,
                                                           higher peak of severity (approximately 3 days of abstinence) compared
                                                           with buprenorphine (4 days) and methadone (7–8 days), as well as a
                                                           shorter overall duration of withdrawal symptoms.
                What is the most appropriate              Long-acting opioids such as methadone and buprenorphine are
                 treatment for this condition?             the most widely accepted ﬁrst-line treatment for opioid withdrawal.
                                                           Symptomatic treatments such as clonidine and bentyl for autonomic
                                                           instability and abdominal distress may also be used. A point scoring
                                                           system of clinical signs can be used, in which a score of zero is given
                                                           if a sign is absent, a score of one if it is present, and a score of two if it
                                                           is severe. The signs to be scored include dilated pupils, runny nose,
                                                           watery eyes, “goose” ﬂesh, nausea or vomiting, diarrhea, yawning,
                                                           cramps, restlessness, voiced complaints, and increased vital signs. The
                                                           point total is equated with a total dosage of methadone to be given,
                                                           in milligrams. The patient should be rescored and redosed at 6-hour
                                                           intervals. A 24-hour total should be calculated, and then, after the
                                                           patient has been stabilized, should be reduced by 10% per day. After
                                                           the acute withdrawal period has ended, the patient should be referred
                                                           to an outpatient opioid maintenance program (i.e., a methadone
                                                           clinic) or an abstinence-based program (e.g., Narcotics Anonymous)
                                                           to prevent further drug abuse and related physical, social, and legal
                                                           morbidity.

               422
 CASE 17                    A 21-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by his girlfriend because of
                             his “wild” behavior over the past 2 weeks. His girlfriend reports that during this period
                             of time he has slept very little each night and that he seems to be talking faster than
                             usual. He also has stopped attending his classes at the local community college. He
                             frequently writes in a notebook, although his girlfriend states that the excerpts she has
                             read make no sense. She also reports that he has depleted his bank account on a buying
                             spree at a department store. When questioned, he conﬁrms his recent purchases and
                             states that he will make more money after he completes the novel he is writing.

 What conditions should be                  Psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and schizoaffective
  included in the differential                disorder.
  diagnosis?                                 Substance-induced mood disorder.
                                             Mood disorder due to a general medical condition such as AIDS,
                                              endocrinopathies, lupus, neurological disorders.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Bipolar I disorder. This condition is a mood disorder that can be
                                            diagnosed after a single manic episode, although most patients
                                            experience both manic and depressive episodes. A manic episode is
                                            deﬁned as a period of persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
                                            that lasts at least 1 week, causes marked impairment, is not due to the
                                            effects of a substance or a general medication condition, and presents
                                            with at least three (or four, if the mood is irritable) of the following
                                            symptoms, recalled best by the mnemonic DIG FAST:
                                            Distractibility

                                                                                                                           PSYC H IATRY
                                            Insomnia
                                            Grandiosity
                                            Flight of ideas
                                            Activity/psychomotor agitation
                                            Sexual indiscretions
                                            Talkativeness
 How is this condition classiﬁed?           Bipolar I: At least one manic or mixed episode that may alternate
                                              with major depressive/hypomanic episodes.
                                             Bipolar II: At least one major depressive episode and one hypomanic
                                              episode. Patients do not meet criteria for full manic or mixed
                                              episodes.
                                             Rapid cycling: Four or more episodes (major depressive, manic,
                                              mixed, or hypomanic) in 1 year.
                                             Cyclothymia: Chronic and less severe than rapid cycling; this
                                              diagnosis includes alternating episodes of hypomania and moderate
                                              depression.
 What is the epidemiology of this          The lifetime risk of bipolar I disorder is approximately 1%, and it is
  condition?                                equally prevalent among men and women and across racial groups.
                                            The mean age of onset is 30 years old, and the frequency of mood
                                            episodes increases with age. A family history of bipolar disorder
                                            increases the risk. Ten to ﬁfteen percent of patients diagnosed with
                                            bipolar disorder successfully commit suicide.
 What is the most appropriate              Acute mania is treated with mood stabilizing medications. These
  treatment for this condition?             include lithium, antiepileptics, and/or antipsychotics. Benzodiazepines
                                            may be useful when there is prominent agitation. Electroconvulsive
                                            therapy has also been shown to be effective.

                                                                                                                     423
                CASE 18                      A 28-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician for an annual checkup.
                                              During the examination, the doctor notices several linear scars and a few dime-sized
                                              burns on her arms and thighs. When he inquires about these, the patient admits to
                                              cutting herself with a utility knife and burning herself with cigarettes. She then starts
                                              crying and states these episodes occur when she gets “stressed out” and agitated when
                                              she perceives that people have abandoned her. She denies that these are suicidal
                                              gestures but admits that she frequently threatens to commit suicide and drives erratically
                                              to see if she might get into a life-threatening accident. She describes her relationship
                                              with her boyfriend as “out of control” and states that they are constantly ﬁghting with
                                              each other. These ﬁghts, which are often violent, are usually over her drinking and drug
                                              use. Surprised that she would reveal so much to him, the doctor questions her on this.
                                              She says she is willing to conﬁde in him because she likes him more than any other
                                              doctor she has seen. In fact, she thinks the other doctors are “quacks” and should not be
                                              allowed to practice.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?         Although a thorough diagnostic workup is needed, this patient
                                                            exhibits several of the traits of borderline personality disorder (BPD).
                                                            This Axis II, Cluster B disorder represents a pervasive pattern of
                                                            mood instability, unstable and intense interpersonal relationships,
                                                            impulsivity, inappropriate or intense anger, lack of control of anger,
                                                            recurrent suicidal threats or gestures, self-mutilating behavior, marked
                                                            and persistent identity disturbance, chronic feelings of emptiness or
                                                            boredom, and frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment.
                                                            They may also experience transient paranoid ideation or dissociative

PSYC H IATRY
                                                            symptoms.

                Who is most likely to be affected          This is one of the more common personality disorders among
                 with this condition?                       psychiatric patients. Its frequency in the general population is between
                                                            1% and 2%, and 15–20% in psychiatric inpatient populations. Women
                                                            are three times more likely to be affected than men.
                What comorbid conditions often             Other Axis II disorders are common among those with BPD; patients
                 exist with this condition?                 may also be histrionic, antisocial, or narcissistic types. Among Axis
                                                            I comorbidities are mood disorders (especially depression), anxiety
                                                            disorders, and substance abuse disorders. Most researchers believe there
                                                            is a close association between childhood physical and sexual abuse and
                                                            BPD. Forty to seventy-one percent report a history of sexual abuse, and
                                                            25% of patients with BPD also suffer from posttraumatic stress disorder.
                What defense mechanism is this             Her attitude toward this doctor and the others she has seen is an
                 patient exhibiting?                        example of splitting. This is a defense mechanism in which patients
                                                            rigidly separate positive and negative feelings in order to guard against
                                                            uncomfortable emotional conﬂicts or stressors. Patients with BPD often
                                                            see their world in a black or white perspective without any shades of gray.
                                                            They alternately idealize and devalue important people in their lives and
                                                            have enormous difﬁculty experiencing two contradictory emotions at one
                                                            time. Borderlines can split the people in their life into warring “good”
                                                            and “bad” factions that unwittingly act out the patient’s internal conﬂicts.
                What is the most appropriate               In addition to psychotherapy, practice guidelines recommend
                 treatment for this condition?              symptom-targeted pharmacotherapy. Antipsychotics such as risperidone
                                                            or ziprasidone can be helpful in treating perceptual distortions; lithium
                                                            carbonate, valproate, or other mood stabilizers can be useful in treating
                                                            mood swings. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are useful in
                                                            treating depressive symptoms and suicidal ideations and behavior.

               424
 CASE 19                      A 22-year-old college student is referred to the dean of students because he is
                               continuously missing assignment deadlines and is doing poorly on his examinations.
                               He denies that he needs help with these issues and blames his poor performance on
                               the unreasonable demands of his professors. He explains that he is unable to complete
                               examinations because they are too long, and that the portions he does ﬁnish are very
                               well written and infallible in their correctness. He explains that he keeps to a very rigid
                               study schedule and does not waste time with “frivolous” activities like spending time
                               with friends. As evidence, he presents his personal organizer that is impressive with
                               the details of his schedule and long lists of things to do. When it is suggested that he
                               join a study group, he adamantly refuses, stating that his classmates are inferior and
                               would have nothing to contribute to his learning. He says that if the other students were
                               more like him, they would get more done, but as it is, they are just lazy and unfocused.
                               Sensing a deeper psychological root to his student’s problems, the dean refers him to
                               the student counseling center but strongly doubts he will keep the appointment.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?          This student exhibits traits of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
                                              (OCPD). According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
                                              Mental Disorders, 4th ed., Text Revision DSM-IV-TR, these patients
                                              are “preoccupied with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and
                                              interpersonal control, at the expense of ﬂexibility, openness, and
                                              efﬁciency.” The ﬁve areas that cause the most anxiety for individuals
                                              with OCPD are time, personal and social relationships, cleanliness,
                                              tidiness, and money. This manifests in their lives as rigidity and
                                              stubbornness, and they are often moralistic about others and their work

                                                                                                                             PSYC H IATRY
                                              habits, especially when they are compared to their own. In spite of
                                              this obsession with organization and schedules, they frequently have
                                              trouble meeting deadlines and run into trouble at work or school.

 What other characteristics are              Among the criteria that deﬁne this disorder in the DSM-IV-TR are
  typical of this condition?                  the inability to discard worn-out or worthless objects that have no
                                              sentimental value to the patient, a miserly spending style in spite of
                                              adequate ﬁnancial resources, an inﬂexibility concerning matters of
                                              morality, ethics, or values, and an unwillingness to delegate or work
                                              with others unless they submit exactly to their way of doing things.
                                              This is an ego-syntonic disorder, and those afﬂicted resist assuming
                                              responsibility for their failings. Instead, they blame others as the cause
                                              of their shortcomings.
 What are the differences between            Because of the similarity of the names, the differences between
  this condition and obsessive-               OCPD and OCD can be difﬁcult to distinguish. OCPD is an Axis II,
  compulsive disorder (OCD)?                  Cluster C diagnosis that represents a lifelong pattern of perfectionism
                                              and inﬂexibility, typically associated with overconscientiousness and
                                              constricted emotions. No obsessions (intrusive, repetitive thoughts) or
                                              compulsions (ritualistic behaviors) are present that are typical of OCD,
                                              which is an Axis I diagnosis.
 What is the most appropriate                The heterocyclic antidepressant clomipramine and the selective
  pharmacotherapy for this                    serotonin reuptake inhibitors, such as ﬂuoxetine, ﬂuvoxamine,
  condition?                                  and paroxetine, have shown some efﬁcacy in reducing the need
                                              for perfectionism and the unnecessary ritualizing that occasionally
                                              develops.

                                                                                                                      425
                CASE 20                    A 20-year-old man is brought to his primary care physician by his mother, who
                                            is concerned about his behavior. Over the past year, he has become increasingly
                                            withdrawn and has stopped socializing with his friends. He typically spends the
                                            majority of each day alone in his room, although his mother often hears him talking
                                            loudly. When questioned, he states, “The FBI is looking for us, and all of my friends
                                            are working for them.” He admits to auditory hallucinations. He refuses a physical
                                            examination but is noted to have a ﬂattened affect.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Schizophrenia is a disorder characterized by hallucinations, delusions,
                                                          disordered thoughts, behavioral disturbances, and negative symptoms.
                                                          A diagnosis can be established if two or more symptoms are present
                                                          for at least 6 months with social or occupational dysfunction. Positive
                                                          symptoms include hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized speech/
                                                          behaviors. Negative symptoms include ﬂat affect, decreased emotional
                                                          reactivity, poverty of speech, and lack of purposeful actions.

                How is this condition classiﬁed?          Catatonic: Deﬁned as a psychomotor disturbance with more than
                                                            two of the following symptoms: excessive motor activity, immobility,
                                                            extreme negativism or mutism, posturing, peculiar mannerisms,
                                                            echolalia, or echopraxia.
                                                           Disorganized: Speech and behavioral patterns are highly
                                                            disorganized. Flat affect is a prominent feature.
                                                           Paranoid: Delusions, often persecuting, and/or hallucinations are
                                                            present. Cognitive function is preserved.

PSYC H IATRY
                What is the epidemiology of this         The prevalence of schizophrenia is approximately 1%, and it occurs
                 condition?                               equally in men and women. However, men tend to develop the disease
                                                          earlier than women. Peak age of onset is 18–25 years in men and 25–35
                                                          years in women. Schizophrenia in ﬁrst-degree relatives increases the
                                                          risk of the disorder.
                What conditions should be                 Mood disorders with psychotic features: Psychosis occurs only during
                 included in the differential               an episode of depression or mania.
                 diagnosis?                                Organic causes of psychosis including neurological and medical
                                                            disorders.
                                                           Schizophreniform disorder: Symptoms of schizophrenia present < 6
                                                            months.
                                                           Schizoaffective disorder: The presence of both schizophrenia and a
                                                            major affective disorder, with a period of 2 weeks of active psychotic
                                                            symptoms without mood symptoms.
                                                           Substance abuse: Psychosis can occur as a result of cocaine,
                                                            amphetamines, phencyclidine (PCP), and lysergic acid diethylamide
                                                            (LSD).

               426
 What is the most appropriate    Schizophrenia is best managed with antipsychotic medications and
  treatment for this condition?   hospitalization during psychotic episodes. Cognitive-behavioral
                                  therapy, supportive psychotherapy, family therapy, and social skills
                                  training may be beneﬁcial.
 What adverse events are         Treatment with antipsychotics can result in neuroleptic malignant
  associated with treatment?      syndrome and extrapyramidal side effects like tardive dyskinesia,
                                  parkinsonism, akathisia, and acute dystonia. These result from the
                                  blockade of dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia and occur more
                                  commonly with high-potency antipsychotics. With the newer atypical
                                  antipsychotics, extrapyramidal side effects can occur although more
                                  rarely. A metabolic syndrome including increases in weight, fasting
                                  blood glucose, and cholesterol is more common.

                                                                                                               PSYC H IATRY

                                                                                                         427
                CASE 21                    A 26-year-old man presents to a psychiatrist at the Veteran’s Administration Behavioral
                                            Health Outpatient Clinic 2 years after being discharged from the Army. While enlisted,
                                            he served two tours overseas and saw active combat in the Persian Gulf region. He
                                            witnessed three fellow soldiers killed by a roadside bomb and states that he cannot get
                                            these and other disturbing images out of his head. He tells the psychiatrist that, since
                                            he returned home, “Things just have not been the same.” He says he does not sleep
                                            much because of nightmares during which combat scenes are replayed. He also ﬁnds
                                            himself ﬂinching each time he hears helicopters ﬂying overhead. He refuses to watch
                                            the nightly newscasts that cover the war and will not read newspaper stories about it. He
                                            says he has not been able to “let down his guard,” even with his wife. Their relationship
                                            has been strained by his emotional distance and his frequent angry outbursts. Since
                                            his discharge he has held four jobs, none longer than 5 months, and he is currently
                                            unemployed. On mental status examination, his appearance, behavior, and speech
                                            are normal. He does have an exaggerated startle response when his cellular phone
                                            rings during the interview. He describes his mood as “depressed,” and his affect is
                                            congruently dysphoric. His thought process is linear and logical, and he denies auditory
                                            or visual hallucinations. He also denies homicidal or suicidal ideations.

                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Chronic posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), as a result of the
                                                          traumatic events he experienced while on active duty. He is persistently
                                                          reexperiencing the scenes he witnessed in his nightmares. He avoids
                                                          reminders of the events by refusing to watch or read about the war.
                                                          He is emotionally detached from his wife and has symptoms of
                                                          hyperarousal, including insomnia and angry outbursts. This is causing

PSYC H IATRY
                                                          signiﬁcant distress due to his inability to maintain employment and
                                                          his relationship with his wife. Since the duration of symptoms is
                                                          > 3 months, this is chronic PTSD and not acute PTSD (note that his
                                                          symptoms must exist for at least 1 month in order to be qualiﬁed as
                                                          PTSD). Any event that involves actual or threatened death, serious
                                                          physical injury, or a threat to one’s physical integrity may precipitate
                                                          PTSD. The events, by deﬁnition, must be severe enough to be outside
                                                          the range of normal human experience. Therefore, events such
                                                          as divorce, loss of a job, or the death of a loved one would not be
                                                          considered stressors that cause PTSD.

                What is the epidemiology of this         The prevalence of PTSD in the general population ranges from 1%
                 condition?                               to 3%, with women being twice as likely to develop the disorder. The
                                                          disorder is more likely to occur in those who have limited social support
                                                          (e.g., single, divorced, widowed) or a lower socioeconomic status. The
                                                          strongest predictor is a history of mental illness preceding the stressor.
                What is the course and outcome           Symptoms of PTSD may occur immediately after the event or surface
                 of this condition?                       years afterward. For those with chronic PTSD, the symptoms can last
                                                          for decades; they often ﬂuctuate and are worse during times of stress.
                                                          Many patients with the disorder develop mood disorders such as major
                                                          depression, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders, notably
                                                          with alcohol. Rapid onset of symptoms, healthy functioning prior to
                                                          the inciting event, strong social support, and the absence of comorbid
                                                          psychiatric or medical issues are factors associated with a good outcome.
                What is the most appropriate             Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as sertraline and
                 pharmacotherapy for this                 paroxetine, as well as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase
                 condition?                               inhibitors, have been used to decrease symptoms of depression,
                                                          reduce the intrusive symptoms such as nightmares and ﬂashbacks, and
                                                          normalize sleep.

               428
 CASE 22                   At her initial ofﬁce visit, a 29-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint of
                            weakness and malaise of 3 years’ duration. She states, “I’ve learned to live with weakness
                            and tiredness all the time.” These symptoms began shortly after she gave birth to her
                            only child, and she thought it might be because of her difﬁcult pregnancy, during
                            which she experienced nausea and vomiting throughout the 9 months. Over the course
                            of the next 3 years, she consulted many physicians with a variety of complaints: diffuse
                            abdominal pain, trouble swallowing, constipation, headache, back pain, joint pain,
                            and excessive menstrual bleeding. To evaluate the abdominal pain and constipation,
                            she had a barium enema examination and upper gastrointestinal x-ray series. The test
                            results were normal. On her most recent visit, she states she has been feeling a strange
                            numbness and tingling in her left leg. Her past surgical history is signiﬁcant for an
                            appendectomy, cholecystectomy, and arthroscopic surgery on her right knee. She has
                            been unable to work because of her symptoms and claims they have “ruined her life.”
                            The mental status examination is notable for the patient’s anxious affect.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       This patient has somatization disorder. This disorder is characterized
                                           by numerous physical complaints that cannot be explained by
                                           any medical condition and that involve most of the organ systems.
                                           According to the DSM-IV-TR, these complaints must consist of four
                                           pain symptoms, two gastrointestinal symptoms, one sexual symptom,
                                           and one pseudoneurological symptom. These somatic complaints
                                           begin before the age of 30, must occur over a period of several years,
                                           and result in medical treatment or cause signiﬁcant impairment in
                                           areas of functioning. There cannot be any evidence that the symptoms

                                                                                                                          PSYC H IATRY
                                           are feigned or intentionally produced, in which case the patient
                                           would more appropriately be diagnosed with factitious disorder or
                                           malingering. This disorder affects mostly women.

 What are other somatoform                Other somatoform disorders include: conversion disorder,
  disorders?                               pain disorder, hypochondriasis, body dysmorphic disorder, and
                                           undifferentiated somatoform disorder. Hypochondriasis is marked by
                                           an overreaction to minor physical symptoms or sensations. Patients
                                           usually do not complain of disabling pain and are more focused on the
                                           development of one severe condition rather than multiple conditions,
                                           as is the case in somatization disorder.
 What is the best approach for this       A brief physical examination should be performed to address each new
  patient?                                 complaint, but laboratory and diagnostic procedures should be kept to a
                                           minimum or avoided to minimize the risk of iatrogenic complications.
                                           The presence or absence of objective signs should guide physicians to
                                           determine whether labs or procedures are needed. Patients with this
                                           disorder often visit several physicians with their multiple complaints;
                                           hence, an effort must be made to identify one primary caregiver who
                                           will be aware of all the specialists involved. It is recommended that
                                           the patient be scheduled for regular (usually monthly) brief visits with
                                           this physician, with an emphasis on “caring” rather than “curing” the
                                           patient. Psychotherapy is useful if the patient will pursue it.
 What is the prognosis for patients       Somatization disorder is a chronic illness. The symptoms are chronic
  with this condition?                     and ﬂuctuating; they rarely disappear completely. It often leads to
                                           repeated surgeries, drug abuse, marital instability, major depression,
                                           and suicide attempts. Approximately two-thirds of patients also have
                                           personality disorders such as borderline or histrionic personality disorder.
                                           A family history of somatization disorder is very common. There is also a
                                           high comorbidity of childhood sexual abuse and neglect (30–70%).

                                                                                                                  429
                CASE 23                   A 14-year-old boy is being evaluated by his pediatrician. Two years ago he began
                                           repetitively shrugging his shoulders. He does so repeatedly throughout the day, but
                                           more frequently during times of stress. He is able to control the urge brieﬂy but
                                           explains that eventually he must “shrug.” In the past few months, he has begun blurting
                                           out embarrassing obscenities in public. He realizes he is doing this, but again, can
                                           only exert brief control over it. He says this happens when he is alone and also at
                                           inappropriate times like in the classroom or at the movies. This has caused him to get
                                           in trouble with his teachers, although he is otherwise doing well in school and has no
                                           problems socializing with his peers. His mother was diagnosed with and is being treated
                                           for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).

                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Tourette’s disorder, which may be diagnosed when a person exhibits
                                                         both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics over a period of a year,
                                                         with no more than three consecutive tic-free months. According to
                                                         the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed.,
                                                         Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), tics are sudden, involuntary, recurrent,
                                                         nonrhythmic, and stereotyped motor movements or vocalizations.
                                                         This is in contrast to the compulsions of obsessive-compulsive disorder
                                                         (OCD), which are voluntary acts. Further in contrast to OCD, the tics
                                                         of Tourette’s need not interfere with normal function, cause marked
                                                         distress, or be excessively time consuming (at least one of these features
                                                         must be present for the diagnosis of OCD). The vocal tics are usually
                                                         socially offensive, such as loud grunting, barking, or shouting words.
                                                         Vocal tics can also include coughing, throat clearing, whistling, etc.

PSYC H IATRY
                                                         Motor tics are also odd and often offensive movements, such as sticking
                                                         out one’s tongue, snifﬁng, eye blinking, kicking, etc. There are many
                                                         different ways patients can tic, but individuals usually identify one or
                                                         two tics particular to them. They are able to exert a mild degree of
                                                         control over the vocal and motor tics but ultimately must submit to
                                                         them.

                What is the epidemiology of this        Tourette’s is uncommon in the general population, with prevalence
                 condition?                              between 1 and 10 per 1000. Monozygotic twins have a concordance
                                                         rate of 50%; dizygotic twins, 8%. Boys are three to nine times more
                                                         likely to be affected than girls. Since tics tend to remit or subside
                                                         as children mature, fewer adults have Tourette’s, and population
                                                         estimates for adults may underestimate the prevalence rates in
                                                         children. The motor component usually emerges by age 7, and the
                                                         vocal component by 11 years of age.
                What factors are among the              There is a strong familial and comorbid link between OCD and
                 etiology and pathophysiology of         Tourette’s. Two-thirds of the ﬁrst-degree relatives of patients with
                 this condition?                         Tourette’s disorder have tics, and a substantial number have OCD
                                                         or attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Some children have the
                                                         onset of Tourette’s symptoms after infection with group A β-hemolytic
                                                         Streptococcus. Tourette’s, along with Sydenham’s chorea, is now
                                                         among the group of syndromes known as the pediatric autoimmune
                                                         neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections
                                                         (PANDAS).

               430
 What is the most appropriate   The dopamine system appears to be involved in tic disorders; therefore,
  pharmacotherapy for this       dopamine antagonists, such as haloperidol, are considered ﬁrst-line
  condition?                     treatment. Haloperidol is usually given in doses lower than those used
                                 to treat psychosis. Recently, Tourette’s has been effectively treated with
                                 the atypical antipsychotics, such as risperidone. Adrenergic agonists
                                 such as clonidine have also shown some degree of tic reduction; a
                                 decrease in the release of norepinephrine in the central nervous system
                                 may lead to a reduction of dopaminergic activity.

                                                                                                              PSYC H IATRY

                                                                                                      431
                CASE 24                    A 47-year-old man was diagnosed with AIDS 3 years ago. Shortly after his diagnosis, he
                                            informed his partner of 8 years over the phone; she subsequently hung up on him and
                                            refused to speak with him again. Since then, he has become progressively more socially
                                            isolated from his friends and family and has started drinking heavily. The pain from
                                            his peripheral neuropathy is a source of constant agony. On several occasions he has
                                            expressed a desire to die to his physician, and against the doctor’s pleas he has stopped
                                            taking his antiretroviral medications. He refuses to seek help from a psychiatrist who
                                            could treat his depression and help him to cope with his illness. He views his illness as
                                            a punishment and sees no good in trying to delay the inevitable. He feels useless and
                                            beyond help.

                What is the epidemiology of              The annual death rate from suicide is higher than the annual death rate
                 suicide in the United States?            from homicide. Suicide is the eighth leading cause of death for adults
                                                          and the second leading cause of death for college students. Nearly 30,000
                                                          suicides occur each year; roughly 1% of the U.S. population commits
                                                          suicide. For every completed suicide, there are 18 failed attempts. For
                                                          men, suicides occur more frequently with age and peak at age 75 years;
                                                          for women, the suicide rate peaks at 40–50 years. Men who commit
                                                          suicide are most likely to be > 45 years old, white, and either separated,
                                                          divorced, or widowed. Women are more likely to attempt suicide; men
                                                          are more likely to complete the act. Most people who commit suicide see
                                                          their physicians before they die, and some communicate their suicidal
                                                          intentions to their physician. Research indicates that more than 90% of
                                                          those who commit suicide have a major psychiatric illness, and half are

PSYC H IATRY
                                                          clinically depressed at the time of the act.

                What is the relationship between         Nearly 5% of people who commit suicide have been diagnosed with a
                 physical illness and suicide?            serious physical illness. Suicide rates are high among those diagnosed
                                                          with AIDS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Huntington’s disease,
                                                          traumatic brain injuries, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s
                                                          disease, and cancer. The suicide rate in patients with AIDS is nearly
                                                          seven times greater than that in the general population. In many of
                                                          these medical conditions, pain is often a contributing factor in the
                                                          patient’s decision to commit suicide.
                What assessment tools are helpful        The following mnemonic (SAD PERSONS) is helpful to remember
                 in identifying suicide risk?             when assessing patients’ suicide risk:
                                                          Sex (male gender)
                                                          Age (older)
                                                          Depression
                                                          Previous suicide attempt
                                                          Ethanol abuse
                                                          Rational thinking loss
                                                          Social support lacking
                                                          Organized plan
                                                          No spouse or partner
                                                          Sickness
                                                          Physicians should be direct in questioning and give the patient an
                                                          opportunity to discuss his or her intentions. Questions to ask include:
                                                           Have you been feeling like life is not worth living?
                                                           Have you been having thoughts of harming yourself?
                                                           Have you developed a plan for taking your life?
                                                           Do you have access to a weapon or means to commit the act?

               432
Pulmonary

Case 1      434

Case 2      436

Case 3      438

Case 4      440

Case 5      441

Case 6      442

Case 7      443

Case 8      444

Case 9      446

Case 10     447

Case 11     448

Case 12     450

Case 13     452

Case 14     453

Case 15     454

Case 16     456

Case 17     458

                  433
              CASE 1                    A 50-year-old woman is recovering in the surgical intensive care unit following
                                         emergency removal of a ruptured appendix. She was extubated on postoperative day
                                         2 but has remained febrile with gram-negative bacteremia. She is receiving cefepime
                                         through a subclavian central venous catheter. Within the past 3 hours, she has become
                                         tachypneic and now requires oxygen via nasal cannula to keep her oxygen saturation
                                         level above 93%. The nurse notes that her temperature is 40.0° C (104.0° F), her heart
                                         rate is 100/min, her respiratory rate is now 30/min, her blood pressure is 90/50
                                         mm Hg, and her oxygen saturation has dropped to 85%. The patient is complaining of
                                         difﬁculty breathing, and high-pitched rales are heard on lung auscultation. The patient
                                         is switched to 100% oxygen via nonrebreather mask, and an arterial blood gas analysis
                                         is performed with the following results: pH 7.30, CO2 50 mm Hg, PO2 55 mm Hg,
                                         HCO3, 18 mEq/L, and O2 saturation 85%. An x-ray ﬁlm of the chest is shown in Figure
                                         15-1. A Swan-Ganz catheter is placed, and the wedge pressure is recorded as 15 mm
                                         Hg.

PU LMONARY

                                         FIGURE 15-1.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS,
                                         Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson LJ, Isselbacher KJ, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
                                         cine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 251-2.)

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). ARDS is severe, acute
                                                        respiratory failure due to endothelial injury and noncardiogenic
                                                        pulmonary edema with hypoxemia and decreased lung compliance.
                                                        The diagnostic criteria are summarized by the mnemonic ARDS:
                                                        Acute onset.
                                                        Ratio of PaO2/FIO2 < 200.
                                                        Diffuse bilateral inﬁltrates seen on x-ray of the chest.
                                                        Swan-Ganz wedge pressure < 18 mm Hg or no evidence of left atrial
                                                          hypertension.

              What are some causes of this             There are many conditions that can lead to ARDS. Most involve
               condition?                               systemic inﬂammation leading to leakage of ﬂuid into the alveolar
                                                        spaces. These include sepsis, pneumonia, aspiration, trauma, smoke or
                                                        toxic gas inhalation, shock, pancreatitis, transfusion reaction, surgery,
                                                        obstetric emergencies, burns, disseminated intravascular coagulation,
                                                        and multisystem organ failure.

             434
 What are the typical radiologic       X-ray of the chest will show diffuse bilateral alveolar inﬁltrates with a
  ﬁndings in this condition?            classic “ground-glass” appearance (see Figure 15-1).
 What are the treatment options        Treatment in ARDS focuses on treating the underlying disease process
  for this patient?                     while supporting ventilation, oxygenation, and circulation. A low
                                        tidal volume ventilation strategy should be employed to minimize
                                        barotrauma. In this patient, broadening antibiotic coverage to treat
                                        potential causes of sepsis is also crucial.
 What is the treatment strategy for    This patient will require invasive mechanical ventilation to maintain
  ventilating this patient?             oxygenation. Ventilating with low tidal volumes (calculate 6 mL/kg
                                        of ideal body weight) has been shown to improve clinical outcomes
                                        in ARDS. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) can improve
                                        oxygenation by keeping collapsed alveoli open. Titrate PEEP and FIO2
                                        to achieve adequate oxygenation; no consensus exists on the optimum
                                        level. When possible, the fraction of inspired oxygen should be kept
                                        below 60% to avoid oxygen toxicity.
 What is the natural history of this   The inﬂammatory cascade in ARDS can either spontaneously remit or
  condition?                            lead to progressive ﬁbrosis and ﬁbrosing alveolitis. Mortality remains
                                        high.

                                                                                                                     PU LMONARY

                                                                                                               435
              CASE 2                        A 70-year-old man with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), congestive
                                             heart failure (CHF), myasthenia gravis, and chronic back pain is recovering after a
                                             motor vehicle accident. The patient fractured both tibiae and multiple ribs but escaped
                                             serious internal organ injury. His problem during this hospitalization has been pain
                                             control. He has recently been transitioned to oral oxycodone, but morphine injections
                                             are still needed for breakthrough pain. At the 4 A.M. vital sign check, the night nurse
                                             ﬁnds him unarousable. He has a respiratory rate of 5/min and an oxygen saturation of
                                             80% by pulse oximetry. His heart rate is 80/min, and blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg.
                                             He has pinpoint pupils, a normal cardiac exam, and clear lung ﬁelds. Arterial blood
                                             gas analysis shows a pH of 7.02, partial pressure of CO2 of 90 mm Hg, partial pressure
                                             of O2 of 45 mm Hg, and bicarbonate of 24 mEq/L. Administration of 100% oxygen
                                             by nonrebreather mask raises the oxygen saturation to 95%. Review of the medication
                                             log shows that the patient got two morphine injections in addition to his maximum
                                             oxycodone dosage.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?          Acute hypercarbic respiratory failure secondary to opiate overdose.
                                                           Opiates depress the central drive to breathe, ﬁrst causing hypercarbia
                                                           and then hypoxia. Some of the other potential causes suggested by
                                                           the patient’s history include COPD or asthma exacerbation, ﬂash
                                                           pulmonary edema secondary to CHF, or respiratory muscle weakness
                                                           due to myasthenia gravis. However, pinpoint pupils, decreased mental
                                                           status, depressed respiratory rate, and recent opiate use suggest narcotic
                                                           overdose.

PU LMONARY
              How is the diagnosis approached?            The ﬁrst step should be pulse oximetry and an arterial blood gas
                                                           analysis. This will differentiate between hypercarbic or hypoxemic
                                                           respiratory failure. Supplemental oxygen should also be administered.
                                                           If this improves oxygenation, the pathology is due to ventilation/
                                                           perfusion (V/Q) mismatch. If oxygenation does not improve, suspect a
                                                           physiologic shunt.
              How is the A-a gradient                     The A-a gradient is the difference between alveolar (PAO2) and arterial
               calculated, and what is its                 (PaO2) oxygenation. It is calculated as:
               signiﬁcance?
                                                                          [(PATM − 47) × FIO2] − (PaCO2 / 0.8) − PaO2
                                                           A normal A-a gradient is 5–10 mm Hg. An increased gradient
                                                           indicates a problem getting alveolar oxygen into the bloodstream.
                                                           Hypoventilation alone produces mild hypoxemia with a normal A-a
                                                           gradient.
              What conditions should be                   The differential diagnosis for acute respiratory failure is very broad
               included in the differential                and can be divided into two categories: hypercarbic and hypoxemic.
               diagnosis?                                  Hypercarbia is caused by decreased ventilation due to loss of central
                                                           drive (secondary to toxins or brain stem injury) or respiratory muscle
                                                           failure (due to neuromuscular disease such as myasthenia gravis,
                                                           Guillain-Barré syndrome, or botulism). Hypoxemic respiratory failure
                                                           is most commonly caused by V/Q mismatch or shunt. Hypoxemia
                                                           that corrects with oxygen therapy is due to V/Q mismatch, often due to
                                                           intrinsic lung disease such as COPD, asthma, interstitial lung disease,
                                                           or a pulmonary embolus. Hypoxemia due to shunt physiology can be
                                                           the result of a true vascular or intracardiac shunt; severe alveolar ﬁlling
                                                           as seen in ARDS, pneumonia, pulmonary edema, or hemothorax can
                                                           also result in hypoxemia.

             436
 What is the most appropriate    The underlying disease process must be addressed; in this
  treatment for this condition?   case, naloxone will reverse the effects of the opiates on central
                                  hypoventilation. Patients may require intubation and mechanical
                                  ventilation to rapidly correct hypoventilation while the effects of the
                                  opiates wear off. Oxygenation can be improved by increasing FIO2 and
                                  adding positive end-expiratory pressure in a mechanically ventilated
                                  patient. Hypercarbia is corrected by increasing the minute ventilation
                                  (by increasing respiratory rate and/or tidal volume in a mechanically
                                  ventilated patient).

                                                                                                            PU LMONARY

                                                                                                     437
              CASE 3                    A 16-year-old boy presents to his pediatrician complaining of worsening cough,
                                         shortness of breath, and wheezing. Until a few months ago, he would have these
                                         symptoms only while exercising during the winter; lately, he has had to sit out during
                                         gym class three times a week. He has also awakened from sleep unable to catch his
                                         breath four times in the past month. He is asymptomatic at present. On physical
                                         examination, he is afebrile, with a heart rate of 80/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, and
                                         blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg. His cardiovascular examination reveals a regular rate
                                         and rhythm with a normal S1 and S2 and no extra heart sounds. His chest is clear to
                                         auscultation, without wheezes, crackles, or rhonchi. In the ofﬁce, his peak expiratory
                                         ﬂow reading (PEF) is within normal limits.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Asthma, which is a lung disease characterized by the presence of
                                                        reversible airway obstruction, airway inﬂammation, smooth muscle
                                                        hypertrophy, and bronchial hyperreactivity. The diagnosis is suggested
                                                        by the classic triad of episodic cough, shortness of breath, and
                                                        wheezing with a return to baseline normal lung function between
                                                        exacerbations. While each symptom alone could be caused by a
                                                        number of conditions, the positive predictive value increases as the
                                                        number of symptoms increases. This patient’s case would be classiﬁed
                                                        as mild persistent due to his symptom frequency (see Table 15-1).

              What tests and/or imaging tools          Because the patient is currently asymptomatic, the diagnosis
               could be used to conﬁrm the              should be conﬁrmed with either serial peak ﬂow measurements or
               diagnosis?                               bronchoprovocative testing. In asthmatic patients, PEF will decrease >

PU LMONARY
                                                        20% from baseline during symptoms. In a positive bronchoprovocative
                                                        test, the inhalation of methylcholine induces bronchoconstriction and
                                                        a decrease in the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1); this
                                                        effect is reversible with albuterol (a short-acting β-agonist). A chest x-ray
                                                        should be performed to rule out other causes of airway obstruction.
                                                        An eosinophil count and immunoglobulin E level may help provide
                                                        evidence of other allergic, atopic, or vascular disease.
              How is this condition classiﬁed?         See Table 15-1.
              What is the most appropriate             Avoidance of triggers (pets, dust, perfumes, cold) is an important part
               treatment for this condition?            of management; see also Table 15-1 for recommended pharmacologic
                                                        management. Remember that patients with asthma more severe than
                                                        the mild intermittent form should be on inhaled corticosteroids. The
                                                        major medications used in asthma exacerbations can be remembered
                                                        are summarized by the mnemonic ASTHMA:
                                                        Albuterol (for short-term rescue).
                                                        Steroids (inhaled or systemic in severe cases).
                                                        Theophylline (narrow therapeutic window).
                                                        Humidiﬁed oxygen (in acute exacerbations).
                                                        Mg (acute exacerbation) and Mast cell stabilizers (cromolyn sodium
                                                          and nedocromil).
                                                        Anticholinergics (acute exacerbation) and Antileukotrienes (zileuton,
                                                          montelukast, and zaﬁrlukast in chronic therapy).

             438
TA B L E 15 - 1 .    Classiﬁcation, Diagnosis, and Management of Asthma

                           DAYTIME           NIGHTTIME
   CLASSIFICATION          SYMPTOMS          SYMPTOMS            PULMONARY FUNCTION TESTS     MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

   Mild intermittent       ≤ 2 times/week    ≤ 2 times/month     FEV1 or PEF ≥ 80% of         Short-acting bronchodilators
   (Step 1)                                                      predicted; PEF variability   only as needed.
                                                                 ≤ 20%.

   Mild persistent         2–6 times/week    > 2 times/month     FEV1 or PEF ≥ 80% of         Step 1 medications plus daily
   (Step 2)                                                      predicted; PEF variability   low-dose inhaled steroids (or
                                                                 20–30%.                      mast cell stabilizer).

   Moderate                Daily             1 time/week         FEV1 or PEF 60–80% of        Step 2 medications plus long-
   persistent (Step 3)                                           predicted; PEF variability   acting bronchodilators and
                                                                 ≥ 30%.                       antileukotriene trial.

   Severe (Step 4)         Continuous        Frequent            FEV1 or PEF ≤ 60% of         Step 3 medications plus
                                                                 predicted; PEF variability   high-dose inhaled steroids,
                                                                 ≥ 30%.                       systemic steroids, and other
                                                                                              therapies.

                                                                                                                                 PU LMONARY

                                                                                                                           439
              CASE 4                     A 40-year-old woman presents to her physician complaining of a cough, headache, low-
                                          grade fevers, nausea, loose stools, and malaise for the past 2 weeks. Physical examination
                                          reveals a temperature of 38.0° C (100.4° F), heart rate of 90/min, and respiratory rate
                                          of 15/min. Chest examination reveals faint diffuse rales and wheezes in bilateral lung
                                          ﬁelds. X-ray of the chest shows bilateral interstitial inﬁltrates. Her CBC does not reveal
                                          any leukocytosis or other abnormality.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Community-acquired pneumonia, likely an atypical pneumonia.
                                                        The triad of indolent onset, extrapulmonary manifestations, and lack
                                                        of leukocytosis suggests pneumonia caused by an atypical bacterial
                                                        pathogen. The three most common bacterial pathogens causing
                                                        atypical pneumonia are Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia
                                                        pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila. Viral causes of pneumonia,
                                                        including inﬂuenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), can also
                                                        present in this fashion. The clinical history of this patient suggests
                                                        Mycoplasma (which is the most common), but clinical presentation is
                                                        neither sensitive nor speciﬁc.

              What tests could be used to              Tests for the three common causes of bacterial atypical pneumonia
               conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    should be performed as follows:
                                                         Mycoplasma: While a cold agglutinin test is often taught, the
                                                          recommended test is an immunoglobulin M (IgM) titer, PCR, or
                                                          antigen detection, if available.
                                                         Chlamydia: Tests include serology, antigen detection, or PCR.

PU LMONARY
                                                         Legionella: The urine antigen test is the best method, although
                                                          attempting a culture is also recommended.
              What are some clinical clues to          As stated above, it can be very difﬁcult to differentiate between the
               help make the diagnosis?                 three causes of atypical pneumonia clinically. However, some cases
                                                        will present with classic signs suggesting a particular diagnosis. For
                                                        example, Mycoplasma can be associated with hemolysis, skin rashes,
                                                        and arthralgias. Legionella can have a gastrointestinal component,
                                                        cause high fevers (> 39.0° C [102.2° F]), and can be associated with
                                                        laboratory abnormalities such as hyponatremia, liver and kidney
                                                        dysfunction, and bradycardia in elderly patients.
              What are the typical radiologic          While atypical pneumonia can present with a lobar consolidation
               ﬁndings in this condition?               similar to other forms of bacterial community acquired pneumonia,
                                                        other patterns of inﬁltration are more frequently seen. In Mycoplasma,
                                                        the most common pattern is peribronchial pneumonia, with streaks
                                                        of inﬁltration and platelike atelectasis. The most common ﬁnding in
                                                        Legionella is a patchy unilobar inﬁltrate, but interstitial inﬁltrates or
                                                        pulmonary nodules can be seen. Chlamydia has no speciﬁc pattern,
                                                        and often presents as a unilateral inﬁltrate. Pleural effusions can be
                                                        seen in all types.
              What is the most appropriate             Antibiotic coverage against all three atypical pathogens should be
               treatment for this condition?            started empirically. Macrolides, such as azithromycin, are the ﬁrst-
                                                        line therapy. While ﬂuoroquinolones are also effective, resistance
                                                        is increasing, and they should not be used in pregnant patients or
                                                        children.

             440
 CASE 5                     A 75-year-old man presents to his primary care physician complaining of decreased
                             exercise tolerance and shortness of breath. He has a 50-pack-year history of smoking
                             cigarettes. On physical examination, he has a barrel-shaped chest, a heart rate of
                             75/min, and a respiratory rate of 20/min. Cardiac examination is normal with no jugular
                             venous distention. Chest examination reveals diminished breath sounds bilaterally with
                             faint expiratory wheezing. He has an oxygen saturation of 93% by pulse oximetry and an
                             arterial blood gas analysis that reveals pH 7.37, PCO2 58 mm Hg, PO2 65 mm Hg, and
                             HCO3 35 mEq/L. An x-ray ﬁlm of the chest reveals hyperinﬂation and subpleural blebs.
                             Results of pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are as follows:
                             Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 1.50 L (65% of predicted)
                             FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) 60% predicted
                             Diffusion capacity (DLCO) 14 mL/min/mm Hg (65% predicted)

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), most likely
                                           emphysema. COPD is a group of disorders that feature progressive,
                                           nonreversible airﬂow limitation. COPD is often thought of as either
                                           emphysema or chronic bronchitis, although clinical overlap is
                                           common. Emphysema is characterized by destruction of the normal
                                           alveoli-capillary structures and enlargement of the airspaces, while
                                           chronic bronchitis is clinically deﬁned as 3 consecutive months of
                                           chronic productive cough twice within a 2-year period. Suggestive
                                           clinical features of COPD include dyspnea, barrel chest, diminished
                                           breath sounds, wheezing, and prolonged expiratory phase. Hypoxemia

                                                                                                                       PU LMONARY
                                           and/or hypercapnia with a chronic respiratory acidosis may be present.
                                           PFTs will demonstrate a decreased FEV1/FVC ratio (< 70%) and
                                           FEV1, indicating airway obstruction. The DLCO is usually decreased
                                           in emphysema. The chest x-ray often reveals hyperinﬂation (with
                                           ﬂattened diaphragms), bullae, and subpleural blebs.

 What risk factors are associated         Smoking is by far the most important risk factor for COPD. The
  with an increased incidence of           emphysema caused by smoke exposure is typically centriacinar and
  this condition?                          located in the upper lobes. Bibasilar panacinar emphysema, especially
                                           in a younger patient or in combination with cirrhosis, may be a clue to
                                           α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency.
 What is the medical management            Smoking cessation (the most important intervention).
  of this condition?                        Inhaled bronchodilator (e.g., albuterol) combined with
                                             anticholinergic agent (e.g., ipratropium or tiotropium).
                                            Inhaled corticosteroids (useful in some patients), with systemic
                                             steroids for acute exacerbations.
                                            Inﬂuenza vaccination.
                                            Pneumococcal vaccination.
                                            Theophylline (useful in some patients).

                                           Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (i.e., bilevel positive airway
                                           pressure [BiPAP]) can be used for acute exacerbations of COPD with
                                           hypercarbia.
 What are some nonpharmacologic           Many COPD patients learn “pursed lip” breathing techniques, and
  interventions for this patient?          pulmonary rehabilitation has been shown to improve quality of life.
                                           Still, continuous oxygen therapy and smoking cessation are the only
                                           treatments that clearly improve mortality in COPD. Surgical options
                                           include lung volume reduction and lung transplantation in appropriate
                                           patients.

                                                                                                                441
              CASE 6                    A 35-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with shortness of breath,
                                         which has been worsening over the past few months. Always fairly active, he was unable
                                         to play tennis this past weekend. He notes a mild cough but denies chest pain with
                                         exertion, fevers, chills, or night sweats. He has no known sick contacts and has not
                                         traveled anywhere recently. He smoked for a few years in his 20s but does not currently
                                         smoke, has never used illicit drugs, and drinks alcohol socially. He has no signiﬁcant
                                         past medical history except persistently elevated transaminases of unknown etiology. On
                                         physical examination, vital signs are within normal limits. The chest wall is tympanitic,
                                         and breath sounds are decreased in both bases. Basic labs and pulmonary function tests
                                         (PFTs) are as follows:
                                         CBC: WBC 8000/mm3, hemoglobin (hematocrit) 14 g/dL (42%), platelets
                                           330,000/mm3
                                         LFTs: Aspartate transaminase (AST) 75 U/L, alanine transaminase (ALT) 92 U/L,
                                           alkaline phosphatase 200 U/L
                                         PFTs: Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 1.9 L (60% predicted), FEV1/
                                           forced vital capacity (FVC) 58% predicted, total lung capacity (TLC) normal

              What is the most likely diagnosis?      Emphysema. The patient’s PFTs, demonstrating decreased FEV1 and
                                                       FEV1/FVC with a normal TLC, are most consistent with an obstructive
                                                       process such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or
                                                       asthma. In contrast, a restrictive process would have a decreased TLC
                                                       with a normal or increased FEV1/FVC. Combined with the physical
                                                       exam and imaging ﬁndings, emphysema is the most likely diagnosis.

PU LMONARY
              What is the most likely etiology        Emphysema in a patient under 45 years old, especially one with a
               and pathophysiology of this             minimal smoking history, is very concerning for α1-antitrypsin (AAT)
               condition?                              deﬁciency. The persistently elevated transaminase levels, indicating
                                                       chronic hepatocyte destruction, are often the earliest sign of the disease.
                                                       Liver damage, beginning as early as infancy, is secondary to the abnormal
                                                       polymerization of the AAT protein inside the hepatocyte, and this
                                                       can result in cirrhosis. AAT is a protease that degrades the elastases
                                                       produced by neutrophil activity; it can be normal, deﬁcient, absent,
                                                       or dysfunctional, depending on the patient’s alleles. The most severe
                                                       genotype is PiZZ, homozygous for deﬁcient AAT deﬁciency. The lack of
                                                       functional AAT leaves the lung parenchyma susceptible to degradation,
                                                       which can ultimately produce severe emphysema. The emphysema in
                                                       AAT deﬁciency is panacinar and basilar predominant, as opposed to
                                                       centrilobular or centriacinar (seen in the more common tobacco-related
                                                       emphysema). Damage from cigarette smoke, which is normally reduced
                                                       by AAT, is markedly accelerated in patients with AAT deﬁciency.
              Who should be screened for AAT          Any patient with emphysema who is < 45 years of age or a nonsmoker
               deﬁciency?                              should be screened, as well as neonates with prolonged neonatal
                                                       jaundice or adults with chronic undeﬁned liver disease. A history of
                                                       young family members with early emphysema should prompt a screen
                                                       as well.
              What is the most appropriate            Treatment for AAT deﬁciency is centered around treating the
               treatment for this condition?           patient’s COPD symptoms. Chronic therapy with bronchodilators
                                                       (β-agonists and anticholinergics) is recommended. Treatment of
                                                       acute exacerbations is oxygen, β2-agonists, anticholinergics, and
                                                       steroids. As with any COPD patient, smoking cessation and irritant
                                                       avoidance, as well as vaccination against S. pneumoniae and inﬂuenza
                                                       is recommended.

             442
 CASE 7                     A 50-year-old woman presents for preoperative testing before elective cholecystectomy.
                             Her medical history is signiﬁcant for biliary colic, a 40-pack-year smoking history, and
                             chronic bronchitis. She is afebrile with a respiratory rate of 12/min. A chest examination
                             is notable for diffuse wheezing, but no lymphadenopathy, clubbing, or breast lumps are
                             appreciated on physical exam. X-ray of the chest is remarkable for a 3.0-cm noncalciﬁed
                             nodule with irregular margins in the right middle lobe. An x-ray ﬁlm taken 1 year ago
                             does not show this lesion. A CT scan of the chest conﬁrms the nodule, which enhances
                             upon intravenous contrast administration. A tuberculin skin test is nonreactive.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Solitary lung nodule, suspicious for lung cancer. The features of
                                            this nodule suggesting malignancy include a size > 2 cm, absence
                                            of calciﬁcation, irregular margins, and appearance within 1 year. In
                                            addition, a nodule in a patient > 45 years of age with a signiﬁcant
                                            smoking history and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease must be
                                            evaluated for cancer.

 What conditions should be                  Benign causes:
  included in the differential                 Arteriovenous malformations.
  diagnosis?                                   Hamartomas.
                                               Infectious granulomas (tuberculosis and fungal disease).
                                               Lung abscesses.
                                             Malignant causes:
                                               Bronchial carcinoid tumors.
                                               Bronchogenic carcinoma (the most common).

                                                                                                                          PU LMONARY
                                               Lymphomas.
                                               Metastases from other primary cancers (colorectal, breast, renal
                                                cell, or melanoma).
 What is the next step in workup           A biopsy must be performed for deﬁnitive tissue diagnosis. If the
  for this patient?                         nodule is malignant, complete staging must include a complete blood
                                            count and liver function panels. Positron emission tomography (PET)
                                            scanning is increasingly used. Bone scans and head imaging are
                                            indicated for symptomatic patients.
 How is this condition classiﬁed?          Lung cancer classiﬁcation and treatment are divided into small cell
                                            lung cancer (SCLC) and non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
                                             SCLC usually presents as a central lesion and is of neuroendocrine
                                              origin.
                                             NSCLC is more common and includes squamous cell carcinoma
                                              (central location), adenocarcinoma (peripheral location),
                                              bronchoalveolar carcinoma (presents with multiple nodules or
                                              inﬁltrate), and large cell carcinoma (rare).
 What are the treatment options            SCLC metastasizes earlier and is often diagnosed at a much later stage
  for this patient?                         than NSCLC. It is not amenable to resection. It will often respond to
                                            chemotherapy and radiation, but almost always recurs and is associated
                                            with a high mortality rate. NSCLC is treated with surgical resection in
                                            the setting of localized disease. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation
                                            may be of beneﬁt with more widespread disease.
 What are some complications of            In addition to metastases (to brain, liver, bone, and adrenals) or
  this disease?                             locally invasive disease (bronchial obstruction, Horner’s syndrome),
                                            lung cancer can cause paraneoplastic syndromes. SCLC tumors can
                                            produce antidiuretic hormone and/or adrenocorticotropic hormone,
                                            and can cause peripheral neuropathy and Lambert-Eaton syndrome.
                                            NSCLC causes hypercalcemia and gynecomastia.

                                                                                                                  443
              CASE 8                     A 60-year-old lawyer presents to his primary care physician complaining of worsening
                                          shortness of breath and chronic dry cough. His past medical history is signiﬁcant for
                                          well-controlled hypertension. He does not smoke. His temperature is 37.0° C (98.6° F),
                                          pulse 80/min, respiratory rate at rest 20/min, and blood pressure 130/80 mm Hg. Chest
                                          examination reveals ﬁne, bibasilar “Velcro” crackles without wheezes. Joints are not
                                          swollen or tender, although clubbing of the digits is noted. Full hematology, electrolyte,
                                          serology, and liver function panels are normal. A CT of the chest is shown below
                                          (Figure 15-2). Results of pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are as follows:
                                          Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio: 90%
                                            predicted
                                          Total lung capacity (TLC): 3.8 L (60% predicted)
                                          Diffusion capacity (DLCO): 17.2 mL/min/mm Hg (70% predicted)

PU LMONARY

                                          FIGURE 15-2.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS,
                                          Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson LJ, Isselbacher KJ, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
                                          cine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig. 243-1.)

              What is the most likely diagnosis?         Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF). PFTs suggest a restrictive process
                                                          (preserved or increased FEV1/FVC ratio, low TLC), and the imaging
                                                          studies are characteristic of a diffuse interstitial lung disease (ILD) with
                                                          ﬁbrosis and honeycomb change. With no history, physical ﬁndings,
                                                          or laboratory data to suggest an identiﬁable cause, the most likely
                                                          diagnosis is IPF. Clubbing and dry cough, while nonspeciﬁc, are often
                                                          seen in IPF.

              What conditions should be                  ILD can be ﬁbrotic/inﬂammatory or granulomatous. Fibrotic/
               included in the differential               inﬂammatory ILD is divided into four main categories: idiopathic,
               diagnosis?                                 pneumoconioses, connective tissue diseases, and iatrogenic (secondary
                                                          to drugs or radiation therapy). Granulomatous disease includes
                                                          sarcoidosis.
                                                           The occupational pneumoconioses include asbestosis, silicosis, and
                                                            coal miner’s disease.
                                                           Connective tissue diseases that can manifest as ILD are rheumatoid
                                                            arthritis, lupus, Sjögren’s disease, and scleroderma.
                                                           Certain chemotherapeutic agents and amiodarone are the most
                                                            common causes of drug-induced ILD.

             444
 What are the typical radiological   While ILD can be diagnosed from a chest x-ray ﬁlm, a CT scan is
  ﬁndings in this condition?          preferred. The high-resolution CT scan in Figure 15-2 shows the
                                      typical CT ﬁndings of basilar and subpleural reticular ﬁbrosis with
                                      honeycombing in severe disease.
 How is the deﬁnitive diagnosis      There are many types of ILD, each with different histopathology, and
  conﬁrmed?                           deﬁnitive diagnosis is made after lung biopsy. The histopathology of
                                      IPF is usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), which shows alternating
                                      patterns of normal lung, interstitial inﬂammation, ﬁbrosis, and
                                      honeycombing. A probable diagnosis of IPF can be made with a
                                      typical clinical history and characteristic high-resolution CT ﬁndings,
                                      preventing open lung biopsy in many patients.
 What is the most appropriate        IPF is a progressive disease, with death usually occurring a few years
  treatment for this condition?       after diagnosis. It does not respond well to available medications,
                                      but many patients are started on a trial of corticosteroids and
                                      immunomodulatory therapy (azathioprine or cyclophosphamide).
                                      Lung transplantation is the only treatment shown to improve survival,
                                      though not all patients are eligible.

                                                                                                                  PU LMONARY

                                                                                                            445
              CASE 9                     A 56-year-old construction worker presents with increasing difﬁculty catching his
                                          breath and chest pain. Upon further questioning, he has had chest pain and trouble
                                          breathing for months. The pain is right-sided, sharp, worse with deep breathing, and
                                          nonradiating. In addition to his presenting symptoms, the patient’s wife notes he is
                                          increasingly fatigued and has lost 4.6 kg (10 lb) over the last 2 months. The patient
                                          denies productive cough or recent infections. He has been in construction for most of
                                          his life, working for a company that remodels old buildings. He endorses a 35-pack-year
                                          smoking history. On physical examination, he is in mild respiratory distress, and there
                                          is dullness to percussion over his right lung base as well as decreased breath sounds.
                                          Serum chemistries, complete blood counts, and electrocardiogram are all within
                                          normal limits. A chest x-ray demonstrates a pleural-based mass and effusion in the right
                                          lower lung.

              What is the most likely diagnosis,       The ﬁndings on chest x-ray of a pleural-based mass are most consistent
               and what exposure contributed to         with malignant mesothelioma. The patient’s occupation of remodeling
               his disease process?                     old buildings places him at risk for asbestos exposure, which is the
                                                        primary risk factor for mesothelioma.

              What is the pathophysiology of           Asbestos contributes to oncogenesis primarily by chronic irritation of
               this condition?                          the pleura and by inducing oxygen free radicals, which damage DNA
                                                        of both pneumocytes and mesothelial cells. The chronic irritation can
                                                        produce pleural plaques (benign) or mesothelioma. The free radical
                                                        damage can produce mesothelioma or bronchogenic carcinoma of the
                                                        lung.

PU LMONARY
              What tests and/or imaging tools          Cytology from the pleural effusion is diagnostic in many cases. When
               could be used to conﬁrm the              cytology is inconclusive, tumor biopsy is helpful, especially with
               diagnosis?                               immunohistochemistry. MRI is useful for determining the extent of
                                                        disease, while positron emission tomography (PET) scanning can help
                                                        distinguish benign pleural plaques from mesothelioma.
              Is smoking a risk factor that            No. However, smoking does increase the risk for bronchogenic
               increases the incidence of this          adenocarcinoma.
               condition?
              What is the most appropriate             The median survival for mesothelioma is 12 months after diagnosis,
               treatment for this condition?            so treatments are primarily palliative. Surgical debulking is an option
                                                        most commonly used in conjunction with radiation, chemotherapy,
                                                        or immunotherapy. Recurrent pleural effusions can be treated with
                                                        pleurodesis—scarring of the pleura to the chest wall to eliminate the
                                                        potential space ﬁlled by pleural ﬂuid. Somatic pain (caused by invasion
                                                        of the chest wall) can be controlled with opiates and nonsteroidal anti-
                                                        inﬂammatory drugs, while neuropathic pain (caused by invasion of
                                                        intercostal nerves) may require the addition of an anticonvulsant.

             446
 CASE 10                    A 50-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of sudden-
                             onset shortness of breath with pain on inspiration. She is 2 weeks status post total
                             knee replacement and has been recovering without complication, although she has
                             not gone to her prescribed physical therapy sessions. Her medications are oxycodone
                             for pain management and hormone replacement therapy. Her temperature is 38.0° C
                             (100.4° F), pulse is 120/min, respiratory rate is 30/min, blood pressure is 110/75
                             mm Hg, and oxygen saturation is 89% by pulse oximetry. X-ray of the chest is normal.
                             An electrocardiogram shows sinus tachycardia with no other abnormalities.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Pulmonary embolus (PE). Clinical signs and symptoms include acute-
                                           onset dyspnea, hypoxia, pleuritic chest pain, hemoptysis, low-grade
                                           fever, rales, and tachycardia.

 What risk factors are associated         PE is caused by a blood clot from the venous system (deep venous
  with an increased incidence of           thrombosis, or DVT) that travels to the lungs and obstructs the
  this condition?                          pulmonary vasculature. Thus, the risk factors are summarized by
                                           Virchow’s triad:
                                            Endothelial injury—due to trauma, surgery, or previous DVT.
                                            Hypercoagulability—can be due to estrogens, genetic conditions, or
                                             malignancy.
                                            Stasis—immobility after surgery or due to other causes.

 What tests and/or imaging tools          The gold standard for diagnosis is pulmonary angiography. A more
  could be used to conﬁrm the              common test is the ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) lung scan, a nuclear
  diagnosis?                               medicine study used to identify V/Q mismatch. Spiral CT scans with

                                                                                                                         PU LMONARY
                                           contrast are by far the most common imaging study because of their
                                           ease of acquisition and ability to see other lung pathology. Lower
                                           extremity Doppler ultrasounds may identify the source of clot. Serum
                                           D-dimer levels are a sensitive but nonspeciﬁc marker of ﬁbrinolytic
                                           activity and are primarily used to rule out DVT/PE in low-risk patients.
                                           Arterial blood gas analysis may show hypoxemia and/or respiratory
                                           alkalosis. The most common ﬁndings on electrocardiogram are sinus
                                           tachycardia or nonspeciﬁc ST-segment and T-wave changes. The
                                           classic S1Q3T3 (indicative of right heart strain) is worth knowing but is
                                           rarely seen.
 What is the strategy for making          It is important to identify and rapidly treat patients with PE, while
  the diagnosis?                           assuring that those without PE are not subjected to unnecessary
                                           treatment. None of the noninvasive tests named above are sensitive
                                           and speciﬁc enough to be used alone. Before the results of an imaging
                                           test (V/Q or CT scan) are interpreted, the clinician must decide on the
                                           patient’s pretest probability of having PE. Only with this information
                                           can the diagnosis be safely made, discarded, or deferred while other
                                           tests (D-dimer, ultrasound, angiography) are performed.
 What is the most appropriate             Long-term anticoagulation is the cornerstone of PE treatment. If no
  treatment for this condition?            contraindications exist, it should be started in patients with high-pretest
                                           probability (such as this one) before further testing is done. Inferior
                                           vena cava ﬁlters can be placed in patients with contraindications to
                                           or failures of anticoagulant therapy. Fibrinolytic therapy is generally
                                           reserved for patients who are signiﬁcantly hemodynamically
                                           compromised.

                                                                                                                 447
              CASE 11                  A 75-year-old woman presents to the emergency department complaining of shortness
                                        of breath at rest. She has a history of non–small cell lung cancer treated 1 month
                                        ago with partial left lung resection. Her temperature is 38.0° C (100.4° F), pulse is
                                        100/min, respiratory rate is 25/min, and blood pressure is 135/80 mm Hg. She is in mild
                                        respiratory distress, and chest examination reveals absent breath sounds and dullness to
                                        percussion at the base of the left lung ﬁeld. Upright and lateral decubitus radiographs of
                                        the chest are shown in Figure 15-3. A left-sided thoracentesis yields 1 L of nonbloody,
                                        turbid ﬂuid. The ﬂuid is tested, and results are as follows:
                                        Protein: 4.0 g/dL
                                        Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 230 U/L
                                        pH: 7.25
                                        Glucose: 35 mg/dL
                                        Hemoglobin: 2 g/dL
                                        Triglycerides: 50 mg/dL
                                        Cytology: negative for malignant cells
                                        Gram stain: negative for bacteria
                                        Cell count: 1500 WBC, 65% lymphocytes
                                        Relevant laboratory test (in serum) are as follows:
                                        Protein: 7.0 g/dL
                                        LDH: 250 U/L
                                        Glucose: 90 mg/dL
                                        Hemoglobin: 12 g/dL
                                        Triglycerides: 100 mg/dL

PU LMONARY

                   A                                                        B
                   FIGURE 15-3.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Chen MYM, Pope TL, Ott DJ. Basic Radiology. New York:
                   McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 4-52.)

             448
 What is the most likely diagnosis?   Exudative pleural effusion, likely secondary to malignancy. The
                                       diagnosis of pleural effusion is suggested by dullness to percussion or
                                       absent breath sounds plus radiographic ﬁndings (blunted costophrenic
                                       angle, asymmetric opacity at the base that moves with change in
                                       position, as seen in Figure 15-3) and conﬁrmed with thoracentesis.
                                       Possible etiologies for the exudative effusion include malignancy,
                                       chylothorax, pulmonary embolus (PE), or parapneumonic effusion.
                                       Malignancy is most likely, as suggested by history, presence of an
                                       exudate, low glucose, and low pH. Cytology has a sensitivity of 65%
                                       and a speciﬁcity of 97% for malignancy.

 How is this condition categorized?   Pleural effusions are categorized as either transudative or exudative. An
                                       effusion is classiﬁed as an exudate if one or more of Light’s criteria are
                                       positive:
                                        Pleural ﬂuid protein/serum protein ratio > 0.5.
                                        Pleural ﬂuid LDH/serum LDH ratio > 0.6.
                                        Pleural ﬂuid LDH > two-thirds the upper limit of normal serum
                                          LDH.
 What conditions should be            Transudative effusions are due to elevated hydrostatic or decreased
  included in the differential         oncotic pressure; they can be caused by congestive heart failure (90%),
  diagnosis?                           cirrhosis, or nephrotic syndrome. Exudative effusions are due to pleural
                                       pathology and leaky capillaries. They are most commonly the result
                                       of malignancy, pneumonia, PE, tuberculosis, rheumatoid arthritis,
                                       lupus, pancreatitis, esophageal rupture, and post coronary artery bypass
                                       surgery. In addition to the effusions listed above, ﬂuid in the pleural

                                                                                                                    PU LMONARY
                                       cavity can also be blood, pus, or chyle, causing the following:
                                        A hemothorax is usually grossly bloody, with a ﬂuid hematocrit level
                                          at least 50% of serum levels.
                                        An empyema is pus in the pleural space. The pleural ﬂuid is
                                          characterized by a low pH, low glucose, and bacteria seen on Gram
                                          stain.
                                        A chylothorax is most often iatrogenic and caused by transection
                                          of the thoracic duct. The pleural ﬂuid will be milky with a high
                                          triglyceride count.

                                                                                                            449
              CASE 12                    A 25-year-old man is brought to the emergency department following a stab wound to
                                          the right back. He complains of difﬁculty breathing and severe pain on his right side.
                                          His vital signs on arriving are a blood pressure of 140/80 mm Hg, heart rate of 100/min,
                                          and respiratory rate of 25/min with oxygen saturation of 90% by pulse oximetry. While
                                          undergoing an x-ray of the chest, he becomes agitated and develops severe respiratory
                                          distress. Vital signs are now blood pressure of 80/60 mm Hg, heart rate of 125/min,
                                          respiratory rate of 40/min, and oxygen saturation of 75% by pulse oximetry. Chest
                                          examination reveals an absence of breath sounds and hyperresonance over the right
                                          lung ﬁeld. Neck examination reveals distended neck veins and leftward tracheal
                                          deviation.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Tension pneumothorax. A tension pneumothorax is a medical
                                                        emergency that should be suspected in any patient presenting with
                                                        penetrating or blunt chest trauma. The signs and symptoms of a
                                                        pneumothorax include unilateral pleural pain, dyspnea, sudden onset,
                                                        decreased or absent breath sounds, hyperresonance, and hyperlucency
                                                        seen on chest x-ray. Remember the mnemonic P-THORAX:
                                                        Pleuritic pain
                                                        Tracheal deviation
                                                        Hyperresonance
                                                        Onset sudden
                                                        Reduced breath sounds (and dyspnea)
                                                        Absent fremitus

PU LMONARY
                                                        X-ray shows collapse
                                                        The presence of hemodynamic instability, tracheal deviation, and
                                                        distended neck veins indicate tension pneumothorax.

              What is the pathophysiology of           In a tension pneumothorax, the chest wall or visceral defect is an
               this condition?                          effective one-way valve, allowing air to accumulate within the pleural
                                                        space that cannot be expelled. Pressure within the hemithorax deviates
                                                        the trachea and compresses the mediastinum, which produces
                                                        hypotension by compromising venous return.
              What are the etiologies of this          A pneumothorax can be spontaneous, traumatic, or iatrogenic in
               condition?                               origin.
                                                         Primary spontaneous pneumothoraces occur in patients with no
                                                          underlying lung disease. It is most often seen in young, tall, thin
                                                          males.
                                                         Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax is seen in patients with lung
                                                          disease, usually chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
                                                          cystic ﬁbrosis, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, or tuberculosis.
                                                         Traumatic pneumothorax can follow blunt or penetrating trauma.
                                                         Iatrogenic pneumothorax is the most common type, where lung is
                                                          injured following central venous line placement, positive pressure
                                                          mechanical ventilation, or thoracentesis.
              What are the typical radiographic        A chest x-ray would reveal hyperlucency, absence of lung markings
               ﬁndings in this condition?               at the periphery, and a pleural line (see Figure 15-4). A tension
                                                        pneumothorax is suggested by hyperexpansion of the ipsilateral
                                                        hemithorax with mediastinal shift and tracheal deviation toward the
                                                        contralateral side.

             450
 What is the most appropriate    Tension pneumothorax is life threatening and is treated by inserting a
  treatment for this condition?   large-bore needle in the second intercostal space in the midclavicular
                                  line. A rush of air will be appreciated and conﬁrms the diagnosis. After
                                  hemodynamic stabilization, a chest tube should be placed. Small,
                                  spontaneous pneumothoraces can be managed with observation and
                                  oxygen therapy alone, while larger ones require evacuation with a
                                  catheter or chest tube.

                                                     (Reproduced, with permission, from Le T, Bhushan V,

                                                                                                                 PU LMONARY
                                  FIGURE 15-4.

                                  Dierberg K, Grow RW. First Aid for the USMLE Step 2 CK, 5th ed. New York:
                                  McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 2.15-6.)

                                                                                                           451
              CASE 13                   A 37-year-old woman with no signiﬁcant past medical history presents to her primary
                                         care physician complaining of dyspnea on exertion accompanied by mild chest pain.
                                         She recently fainted after walking up a ﬂight of stairs. She is afebrile, with a heart rate
                                         of 90/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, blood pressure of 90/70 mm Hg, and oxygen
                                         saturation of 89% by pulse oximetry on room air. Cardiac examination is notable for
                                         a loud pulmonic component to the second heart sound and a systolic murmur best
                                         appreciated at the lower sternal border. Distended neck veins, hepatomegaly, and lower
                                         extremity edema are appreciated. Skin and musculoskeletal examinations are normal.
                                         X-ray of the chest reveals normal lung ﬁelds with cardiomegaly and enlarged pulmonary
                                         vessels. Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) reveal a diffusion capacity of 50%.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). As seen in this
                                                        patient, PAH often goes undiagnosed until the disease is severe and
                                                        the patient presents with symptoms of right heart failure. These signs
                                                        include a tricuspid murmur, distended neck veins, hepatomegaly, and
                                                        edema. Systemic blood pressure is often low due to decreased cardiac
                                                        output. Common symptoms are dyspnea on exertion, chest pain, and
                                                        syncope. In idiopathic PAH, an isolated decreased diffusion capacity is
                                                        the most common abnormality on PFTs.

              What are some etiologies of this         While some cases of PAH are idiopathic, secondary PAH is more
               condition?                               common. Secondary causes include left heart disease (mitral valve
                                                        disease, left ventricular dysfunction), connective tissue disease (lupus,
                                                        scleroderma, and rheumatoid arthritis), parenchymal lung disease with

PU LMONARY
                                                        chronic hypoxemia (emphysema, idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis, and
                                                        cystic ﬁbrosis), and chronic thromboembolic disease. It is also seen in
                                                        patients with HIV, chronic liver disease, and obstructive sleep apnea.
                                                        There is an association with amphetamines, diet pills, and intravenous
                                                        drug use. It is estimated that 5–15% of idiopathic PAH is familial, and
                                                        the gene BMPR2 has been associated with the familial form.
              What tests could be used to              A treatable underlying disease should be investigated with liver
               conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    function tests, HIV and autoimmune serologies, and a sleep study.
                                                        PFTs and imaging to look for pulmonary thromboembolic disease
                                                        are also performed. In cor pulmonale, the electrocardiogram may
                                                        show right axis deviation and signs of right ventricular hypertrophy,
                                                        while an echocardiogram will show enlargement of the right ventricle
                                                        and tricuspid regurgitation with elevated pulmonary artery systolic
                                                        pressures.
              How is the deﬁnitive diagnosis           A right-heart catheterization can determine pulmonary artery pressures
               made?                                    and exclude the presence of pulmonary venous hypertension. PAH is
                                                        deﬁned as a pulmonary artery pressure of > 25 mm Hg at rest and
                                                        > 30 mm Hg with exercise. A vasodilator trial during the procedure
                                                        may help guide therapy.
              What is the most appropriate             The ﬁrst step in management is to treat any underlying disease process.
               treatment for this condition?            Unless contraindicated, PAH patients should be anticoagulated to
                                                        minimize the risk of in situ thrombosis. Supplemental oxygen should
                                                        be used to keep saturation levels > 90%, and right heart failure should
                                                        be treated with diuretics. Acute responders to a vasodilator trial may be
                                                        treated with calcium channel blockers. Symptomatic nonresponders
                                                        may be treated with diuretics, endothelin receptor antagonists (e.g.,
                                                        bosentan), or prostacyclin analogues (e.g., treprostinil or epoprostenol).
                                                        Lung transplantation may be indicated.

             452
 CASE 14                    A 29-year-old African-American woman presents to her primary care physician with
                             a 6-month history of dyspnea on exertion, chronic dry cough, mild chest pain,
                             malaise, and fatigue. Her temperature is 38.0° C (100.4° F), heart rate is 80/min, and
                             respiratory rate is 20/min. Chest examination is notable for faint wheezes only. On eye
                             examination, bilateral erythema at the scleral-corneal border is noted. Laboratory results
                             are notable for a hemoglobin of 13 g/dL, a serum calcium of 12 mg/dL, and an elevated
                             serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is
                             elevated at 80 mm/hr. Results of pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are as follows:
                             Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio: 80%
                             Total lung capacity (TLC): 3.7 L (70% predicted)
                             Diffusion capacity (DLCO): 19.5 mL/min/mm Hg (75% predicted)
                             A lung biopsy is done, and the pathology is reported as “noncaseating granulomas.”

 What is the most likely diagnosis?        Sarcoidosis, a systemic disease marked by the presence of noncaseating
                                            granulomas in multiple organs. Ninety percent of cases have
                                            pulmonary symptoms, such as dyspnea and dry cough, and either
                                            an obstructive or restrictive pattern of PFTs. Primary features can be
                                            summarized with the mnemonic GRUELING:
                                            G: granulomas (noncaseating)
                                            R: rheumatoid-factor positivity, arthritis
                                            U: uveitis (usually anterior)
                                            E: erythema nodosum
                                            L: lymphadenopathy and liver involvement

                                                                                                                          PU LMONARY
                                            I: interstitial ﬁbrosis
                                            N: nervous system involvement and negative TB test
                                            G: gammaglobulinemia

 What conditions should be                 Sarcoidosis causes interstitial lung disease (ILD) with a granulomatous
  included in the differential              pattern. The differential diagnosis of granulomatous ILD includes
  diagnosis?                                hypersensitivity pneumonitis and infectious causes such as tuberculosis,
                                            nontuberculous mycobacteria, and histoplasmosis. Berylliosis has a
                                            very similar clinical presentation to sarcoidosis.
 What is the epidemiology of this          Sarcoidosis is more often seen in female patients aged 20–40 years,
  condition?                                with a fourfold increase in incidence seen in the African-American
                                            population in the United States.
 What is the cause of the                  Hypercalcemia is common in these patients, due to extrarenal
  hypercalcemia seen in this                calcitriol produced by activated macrophages in granulomas. Other
  condition?                                common laboratory abnormalities include elevated erythrocyte
                                            sedimentation rate, alkaline phosphatase, angiotensin converting
                                            enzyme, and γ-globulin levels, as well as a positive rheumatoid factor
                                            and eosinophilia.
 What are the typical radiologic           X-ray of the chest classically shows hilar adenopathy and interstitial
  ﬁndings in this condition?                inﬁltrates. There are four stages of sarcoidosis as characterized by chest
                                            x-ray.
 What is the most appropriate              Many cases of sarcoidosis spontaneously remit, though patients
  treatment for this condition?             presenting at an advanced stage are more likely to have progressive
                                            disease. Extrapulmonary disease requires treatment, with corticosteroids
                                            used as the ﬁrst-line therapy. Patients who do not respond to
                                            corticosteroids may be treated with other immunomodulators, including
                                            cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, and
                                            methotrexate.

                                                                                                                  453
              CASE 15                   A 35-year-old man is sent to the emergency department by a homeless shelter
                                         caseworker after he is seen coughing up blood. He has been living on the streets for the
                                         past 6 months following his release from a 3-year incarceration. He complains of night
                                         sweats and fevers. On physical examination, his temperature is 38.5° C (101.3° F) with
                                         a heart rate of 90/min, a respiratory rate of 15/min, and a blood pressure of 120/80
                                         mm Hg. His physical exam is notable for cachexia. Both lung ﬁelds are clear to
                                         auscultation. His chest x-ray ﬁlm is shown in Figure 15-5, and two of three sputum
                                         samples are positive for acid-fast bacilli.

PU LMONARY
                                         FIGURE 15-5.       (Reproduced, with permission, from Doherty GM, Way LW. Current Surgi-
                                         cal Diagnosis and Treatment, 12th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006: Fig. 18-19.)

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Reactivated tuberculosis (TB). This patient has two important risk
                                                        factors for TB: homelessness and incarceration. The presentation of
                                                        active TB includes night sweats, fevers, hemoptysis, and weight loss.
                                                        Figure 15-5 shows cavitary tuberculosis of the right upper lobe. The
                                                        presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis on a sputum sample conﬁrms
                                                        the diagnosis.

              What is the pathogenesis of this         TB is spread via airborne particles from a person with active
               condition?                               disease, usually after repeated exposure. In most patients, primary
                                                        infection is subclinical and results in an asymptomatic latency
                                                        period that reactivates in 10–20% of patients. Most often seen in
                                                        immunocompromised patients, reactivated TB can manifest as
                                                        inﬁltrates, consolidation, and/or cavitation frequently found in the
                                                        upper lobes.

             454
 How are asymptomatic cases      The puriﬁed protein derivative (PPD), or tuberculin skin test, is used
  detected?                       to screen for latent TB in patients with risk factors or in occupations
                                  with a high risk of exposure to TB. The PPD is considered positive at
                                  different diameters of induration depending on the clinical history of
                                  the patient:
                                   At 5 mm—history of HIV disease or other immunosuppression,
                                     contact with a known TB case, or with radiographic ﬁndings
                                     suggestive of TB.
                                   At 10 mm—history of recent immigration from a high-prevalence
                                     country, residents or employees of high-risk settings (nursing homes
                                     or jails), or patients with certain medical illnesses.
                                   At 15 mm—no identiﬁable risk factors.

 What is the most appropriate    The treatment of active TB requires 6 months of therapy with drugs to
  treatment for this condition?   which the isolate is susceptible. The mnemonic STRIPE outlines the
                                  drugs used in treating TB:
                                  STreptomycin (the ﬁrst successful anti-TB drug, currently not ﬁrst-line
                                     therapy)
                                  Rifampin
                                  Isoniazid
                                  Pyrazinamide
                                  Ethambutol
                                  Directly observed therapy (DOT) is the most effective way to reduce
                                  emergence of resistance. Latent TB should be treated with 9 months of
                                  isoniazid. Rifampin resistance occurs rapidly, so it is never used alone.

                                                                                                              PU LMONARY
 What adverse events are         Isoniazid upregulates cyp2E1 (the enzyme metabolizing
  associated with treatment?      acetaminophen to NADPQI, which is hepatotoxic) and is associated
                                  with age-related hepatotoxicity and peripheral neuropathy (which can
                                  be prevented with pyridoxine). Rifampin can interact with hepatic
                                  clearance of other drugs and is excreted as a red compound in urine
                                  and tears. The major toxicity of ethambutol is optic neuritis.

                                                                                                       455
              CASE 16                    A 44-year-old man presents to the emergency department after coughing up blood
                                          intermittently for the last several days. He notes one prior episode of hemoptysis several
                                          months ago that resolved on its own. He generally dislikes going to the doctor because
                                          he has chronic sinusitis with intermittent bloody discharge, which never gets better “no
                                          matter what they try.” He denies any other medical conditions but notes that he has felt
                                          fatigued over the last year. He has never smoked, has never been incarcerated, and has
                                          never traveled outside the United States. He reports subjective fevers and night sweats
                                          but has no sick contacts. On physical examination, his temperature is 38.2° C
                                          (100.8° F), pulse is 95/min, blood pressure is 135/80 mm Hg, respiratory rate is 18/min,
                                          and oxygen saturation is 95% on room air. Rhonchi are heard in the upper left lung
                                          ﬁeld. Urine histoplasma antigen was negative, as was a sputum stain for acid-fast bacilli.
                                          A CT scan of the head revealed patchy mucosal and periosteal thickening without ﬂuid
                                          levels. A CT scan of the head revealed multiple nodules, some with cavitation as well as
                                          ground-glass inﬁltrates.

              What conditions should be                Causes of hemoptysis include cancer, infection, and vasculitis. This
               included in the differential             patient’s age and lack of smoking history make lung cancer less
               diagnosis?                               likely, and he has no signiﬁcant risk factors for TB (incarceration,
                                                        immunosuppression, or travel to a developing country).

              What is the most likely diagnosis?       Wegener’s granulomatosis. Chronic sinusitis in combination with
                                                        hemoptysis and his history makes Wegener’s granulomatosis the most
                                                        likely cause of his symptoms.
              What organ system involvement            Wegener’s is a small- and medium-sized blood vessel vasculitis

PU LMONARY
               characterizes this condition?            characterized by a triad of upper airway involvement (sinusitis,
                                                        otitis, oral/nasal ulcers, bloody nasal discharge), lower airway
                                                        involvement (dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis), and renal involvement
                                                        (glomerulonephritis). While only 20% of patients have renal
                                                        involvement at presentation, it will develop in almost 80%.
              What tests and/or imaging tools          A CT of the chest is often helpful, as it reveals nodules, cavitations,
               could be used to conﬁrm the              and affected blood vessels. Laboratory results are often inconclusive,
               diagnosis?                               with an elevated WBC count and sedimentation rates. When renal
                                                        involvement is present, RBC casts and proteinuria may be seen
                                                        on urinalysis as well as a rise in blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
                                                        creatinine. Most Wegener’s patients are antineutrophil cytoplasmic
                                                        antibody (c-ANCA) positive, which can be the most useful clue since
                                                        both Churg-Strauss and microscopic polyarteritis are perinuclear
                                                        antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA) positive. Biopsy of the
                                                        nose or throat is positive in only 20% of cases, so open or thoracoscopic
                                                        lung biopsy may be needed to demonstrate the granuloma formation
                                                        and vasculitis consistent with Wegener’s granulomatosis.
              What is the most appropriate             It is imperative to rule out infectious etiologies prior to treating
               treatment for this condition?            Wegener granulomatosis, as an infectious cause may signiﬁcantly
                                                        worsen when immunosuppressive therapy is initiated. In severe
                                                        disease, remission is induced with cyclophosphamide followed by
                                                        maintenance therapy with a less toxic medication. Disease that is not
                                                        life threatening can be managed with milder immunosuppressants such
                                                        as methotrexate and corticosteroids.

             456
 What is the prognosis for patients   Chances of achieving remission are 90% with immunosuppression.
  with this condition?                 Recurrence, expected in 50% of patients, is more likely if they continue
                                       to be ANCA positive during remission. Most patients will have some
                                       long-term sequelae, such as renal insufﬁciency or failure, hearing loss,
                                       facial deformities, thrombosis, or tracheal stenosis. Morbidity from
                                       medical therapy is also common and includes hemorrhagic cystitis and
                                       transitional cell carcinoma from cyclophosphamide.

                                                                                                                  PU LMONARY

                                                                                                          457
              CASE 17                    A 50-year-old man with a past medical history signiﬁcant for type 2 diabetes mellitus
                                          presents to his primary care physician complaining of excessive daytime sleepiness.
                                          He claims that he gets 8 hours of sleep every night yet wakes up every morning with a
                                          headache and dry mouth. He ﬁnds himself to be lethargic and often falling asleep at
                                          work. His wife complains that he snores all night long. He is afebrile, with a heart rate
                                          of 90/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, and blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg. He is 178
                                          cm (5′10″) tall and weighs 115 kg (253 lb). Head and neck examination is notable for
                                          a large, low-hanging soft palate, and a neck circumference of 43 cm (16.9 in). Heart,
                                          lung, and neurologic examinations are unremarkable. Hematology and electrolyte
                                          panels are normal.

              What is the most likely diagnosis?        Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Sleep apnea is an important
                                                         underdiagnosed cause of daytime hypersomnolence in obese patients.
                                                         It is characterized by numerous awakenings during the night due to
                                                         apneic episodes. Snoring, gasping, and choking are often reported by
                                                         those sharing a bed with the patient.

              What conditions should be                 Apnea can be either obstructive or central. Obstructive apnea occurs
               included in the differential              when the resistance in the upper airways is greater than the respiratory
               diagnosis?                                effort. These episodes are characterized by respiratory effort without
                                                         airﬂow. In central apnea, the drive to breathe is lost and the patient
                                                         experiences apnea without respiratory effort. Other causes of daytime
                                                         sleepiness include narcolepsy, depression, restless leg syndrome, and
                                                         insomnia secondary to poor sleep hygiene.

PU LMONARY
              How is this condition diagnosed?          The deﬁnitive diagnosis is made with a sleep study, in which the
                                                         patient spends the night in a sleep center for close monitoring of his or
                                                         her breathing, oxygenation, arousal, and sleeping patterns. An absence
                                                         of airﬂow for 10 seconds or more is considered an apneic episode,
                                                         and the diagnosis of OSA can be made if a patient has 10 or more
                                                         obstructive episodes per hour.
              What are potential complications          Daytime hypersomnolence and subsequent cognitive dysfunction
               of this disorder?                         caused by OSA is the most dangerous aspect of the disease, leading
                                                         to motor vehicle and other accidents. OSA is thought to be an
                                                         independent risk factor for systemic hypertension and cardiovascular
                                                         disease. Sleep deprivation is also associated with increased appetite and
                                                         difﬁculty losing weight, which complicates a disorder already more
                                                         frequent in overweight individuals.
              What are the treatment options            Behavioral modiﬁcations include weight loss, avoiding alcohol and
               for this condition?                       sedatives, and improved sleep hygiene.
                                                         Medical treatment involves continuous positive airway pressure
                                                         (CPAP), a device that supplies positive pressure to keep the upper
                                                         airway open during sleep. The patient wears either a nasal or oral-nasal
                                                         mask connected to a machine. This therapy, while extremely effective,
                                                         is often not well tolerated, so much care should be taken in ﬁnding a
                                                         comfortable and properly ﬁtting mask to improve compliance.
                                                         Surgical techniques to decrease the level of upper airway resistance are
                                                         sometimes used in appropriate patients.

             458
Renal/Genitourinary

Case 1                460

Case 2                461

Case 3                462

Case 4                464

Case 5                466

Case 6                468

Case 7                470

Case 8                472

Case 9                474

Case 10               476

Case 11               478

Case 12               479

Case 13               480

Case 14               482

Case 15               483

Case 16               484

Case 17               486

Case 18               487

Case 19               488

Case 20               490

Case 21               491

                            459
                             CASE 1                     A 44-year-old man with a history of chronic alcoholism enters the emergency
                                                         department obviously intoxicated. He complains of severe epigastric abdominal
                                                         pain radiating to his back, nausea, vomiting, and dyspnea for the past 2 days. On
                                                         examination, his temperature is 38.8º C (101.8º F), pulse is 115/min, blood pressure
                                                         is 110/60 mm Hg, and respirations are 28/min and shallow. His abdomen is rigid with
                                                         diffuse tenderness and hypoactive bowel sounds. Chest examination reveals dullness to
                                                         percussion at the right base. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                                                         Serum Electrolytes          Arterial Blood Gas
                                                         Na+: 142 mEq/L              pH: 7.31
                                                         K+: 3.4 mEq/L               PCO2: 41 mEq/L
                                                         Cl–: 98 mEq/L               PO2: 58 mEq/L
                                                         BUN: 47 mg/dL               HCO3: 21 mEq/L
                                                         Glucose: 210 mg/dL          Serum ketones: 1+
                                                         Chest radiograph shows a large effusion and consolidation in the right lung.

                             What acid-base disturbances              The complications of acute pancreatitis include vomiting, and pleural
                              are suggested by the history and         effusions. Vomiting causes a metabolic alkalosis, while pleural effusions
                              physical exam?                           cause a respiratory acidosis.

                             What acid-base disturbance is            The laboratory data indicate an anion gap of 23 (142 − [98 + 21]);
                              suggested by the electrolytes and        therefore, a metabolic acidosis is also present. The blood gas is

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                              blood gas?                               consistent with the diagnoses suggested by the history and lab data.
                                                                       The PCO2 is inappropriately normal for an acid pH (it should be low),
                                                                       indicating that there is a respiratory acidosis secondary to the pleural
                                                                       effusion.
                             Is the bicarbonate concentration         No. Normally, in an anion gap acidosis, the fall of the bicarbonate is
                              what would be expected for such          proportional to the rise of the gap. For each hydrogen ion produced
                              a large anion gap?                       to lower the bicarbonate concentration, there is an unmeasured
                                                                       anion produced that raises the anion gap. In this patient, the fall in
                                                                       the bicarbonate concentration is less than would be expected, which,
                                                                       combined with the history of vomiting, indicates a metabolic alkalosis.
                             What is the differential diagnosis       Renal failure, ketoacidosis, and drug ingestion are the three broad
                              for anion gap acidosis?                  categories causing anion gap acidosis. The mnemonic MUDPILES
                                                                       includes speciﬁc etiologies:
                                                                       Methanol
                                                                       Uremia
                                                                       Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
                                                                       Paraldehyde
                                                                       Isoproterenol, iron, isoniazid
                                                                       Lactate
                                                                       Ethylene glycol
                                                                       Salicylates
                             What is the most appropriate             Depending on the cause, treatment may include administration of
                              treatment for this condition?            ethanol to decrease methanol and ethylene glycol metabolism to toxic
                                                                       metabolites by alcohol dehydrogenase. (Alcohol dehydrogenase has
                                                                       a 10 times greater afﬁnity for ethanol than methanol.) Hemodialysis
                                                                       may be necessary to remove parent compounds and metabolites.
                                                                       Fomepizole is a new synthetic alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor, which
                                                                       may also be appropriate in this setting.

                            460
 CASE 2                        A 33-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with a three-day history
                                of fever, malaise, and mild nausea. Over the past day, she has also noticed a new rash
                                on her trunk and extremities. She denies any medical problems, except for a urinary
                                tract infection (UTI) 1 week ago, for which she has been taking cephalexin. She is not
                                on any other medications and denies alcohol use. On examination, her temperature
                                is 39.0º C (102.2º F), pulse is 90/min, and blood pressure is 128/82 mm Hg. Findings
                                from her heart and lung examinations are within normal limits, and her abdomen is
                                soft, nontender, nondistended, and with normal bowel sounds present. Her laboratory
                                results are as follows:
                                Sodium: 143 mEq/L
                                Potassium: 4.0 mEq/L
                                Chloride: 102 mEq/L
                                Bicarbonate: 24 mmol/L
                                Blood urea nitrogen: 55 mg/dL
                                Creatinine: 3.2 mg/dL
                                Glucose: 90 mg/dL
                                Urine sediment: white cells, red cells, white cell casts, occasional eosinophils.
                                Urinalysis: leukocyte esterase, negative; nitrites, negative.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?          The clinical picture is highly suggestive of acute interstitial nephritis
                                              (AIN). Although AIN can potentially be caused by infections and

                                                                                                                             RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                              autoimmune diseases, the most common cause by far is medications,
                                              especially nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and antibiotics. Given the
                                              tight temporal relationship between the patient’s use of antibiotics and the
                                              onset of symptoms, drug-induced AIN is the most likely diagnosis.

 How do the urine sediment and               The following ﬁndings would be expected for each condition:
  urinalysis help to distinguish this          Acute tubular necrosis: sediment showing granular and epithelial cell
  condition from other causes of                casts and free epithelial cells.
  acute kidney injury and from a               Acute glomerulonephritis (GN): sediment showing red cell casts as
  UTI?                                          well as free red and white cells.
                                               Prerenal disease: normal sediment.
                                               UTI: ≥ 5 white cells (PMNs)/high-powered ﬁeld (pyuria), bacteria
                                                (bacturia), and positive leukocyte esterase and nitrites.
                                              In contrast, this patient had white cells and casts with no bacteria
                                              (sterile pyuria), no red cell casts (argues against GN), eosinophils, and
                                              negative leukocyte esterase and nitrites (indicates that the UTI has been
                                              cleared).
 What is the typical presentation            AIN can be either subclinical or present as some combination of
  of this condition?                          nausea, vomiting, and malaise if renal insufﬁciency is severe. Less
                                              than 10% of patients will have the classic triad of fever, rash, and
                                              eosinophilia, but a greater percentage will have at least one of those
                                              signs/symptoms.
 What is the most appropriate                She should immediately discontinue the presumed offending drug. It
  treatment for this patient?                 would also be appropriate to consider a trial of corticosteroids, although
                                              this is not deﬁnitely proven therapy.
 What are the typical renal biopsy           Histologically, AIN manifests as interstitial edema and a marked
  ﬁndings in this condition?                  interstitial inﬁltrate consisting of lymphocytes and monocytes, with
                                              associated tubular injury. Interstitial eosinophils, plasma cells, and rare
                                              neutrophils may also be found. Nonnecrotizing granulomas are also
                                              present in some cases of hypersensitivity-induced AIN.

                                                                                                                     461
                             CASE 3                     A 45-year-old man with a history of a cerebrovascular accident and seizure disorder
                                                         is found unresponsive in his home by his neighbor. On arrival to the emergency
                                                         department, his blood pressure is 90/50 mm Hg, heart rate is 110/min, and temperature
                                                         is 37.2° C (99.0° F). Lung and heart examinations are normal, and there is no lower
                                                         extremity edema. A Foley catheter is placed, and 50 mL of brown urine is obtained.
                                                         Pertinent laboratory data are the following:
                                                         Potassium: 5.8 mEq/dL
                                                         Creatinine: 4.3 mg/dL
                                                         Phosphate: 7 mg/dL
                                                         Uric acid: 10 mg/dL
                                                         Creatine phosphokinase (CPK): 12,280 IU/L
                                                         Urinalysis: 1+ blood, trace protein. Urine sediment: many pigmented granular casts

                             What conditions should be                Acute kidney injury (AKI; previously called acute renal failure) can
                              included in the differential             result from damage to any one portion of the kidney: the glomerular
                              diagnosis?                               compartment (e.g., acute glomerulonephritis), the tubulointerstitial
                                                                       compartment (e.g., acute tubular injury [ATI; previously called
                                                                       acute tubular necrosis], acute interstitial nephritis [AIN]), or the
                                                                       vascular compartment (e.g., thromboembolism, vasculitis, thombotic
                                                                       microangiopathy).

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                             What is the most likely diagnosis?       The absence of RBC casts and minimal proteinuria makes glomerular
                                                                       disease unlikely. AIN is associated with pyuria. The pigmented
                                                                       granular (or “muddy brown”) casts suggest ATI. The clinical setting
                                                                       raises the possibility of postictal rhabdomyolysis, supported by the
                                                                       elevated CPK level. In addition, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia,
                                                                       and hyperuricemia occur commonly in patients with rhabdomyolysis
                                                                       and acute kidney injury, making myoglobinuric ATI the most likely
                                                                       diagnosis.
                             What explains the patient’s              Necrosis of muscle cells releases large quantities of potassium,
                              abnormal potassium, phosphate,           phosphate, and purines into the plasma. The end product of purine
                              and uric acid levels?                    catabolism in the liver is uric acid.
                             Why did the patient develop this         Myoglobin is a non-protein-bound monomeric protein and is therefore
                              condition?                               rapidly excreted in the urine. Large quantities cause kidney damage
                                                                       both by obstructing tubules and by causing oxidative injury via the
                                                                       release of free iron. In addition, the hypotension (probably secondary
                                                                       to extracellular ﬂuid volume depletion) is of sufﬁcient magnitude to
                                                                       result in renal ischemia.
                             What ﬁndings would be expected           Though not necessary to make a diagnosis, if a biopsy were obtained,
                              on renal biopsy?                         it would show acute tubular injury with ﬂattened regenerative tubular
                                                                       epithelial changes and also degenerative changes and congestion of the
                                                                       vasa rectae with nucleated RBCs. Pigmented (brownish) intratubular
                                                                       myoglobin casts are also present, which can be conﬁrmed by
                                                                       immunohistochemistry (Note: hemoglobin casts—i.e., after transfusion
                                                                       reaction—can also cause tubular injury and pigmented casts).

                            462
 What is the most appropriate    Treatment consists of early volume repletion with isotonic saline
  treatment for this condition?   to enhance renal perfusion and increase urine ﬂow to wash out
                                  obstructing casts. Volume repletion is less likely to be effective (and
                                  may lead to symptomatic volume overload) if begun after the ﬁrst
                                  6–12 hours, when renal failure is already established. An alkaline-
                                  mannitol diuresis, in which urine pH is raised > 6.5, may diminish
                                  the renal toxicity of myoglobin, because heme pigments are more
                                  soluble in alkaline urine. Raising the pH, however, may promote the
                                  precipitation of calcium phosphate and lead to calculus formation.

                                                                                                             RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY

                                                                                                       463
                             CASE 4                    A 55-year-old, 70-kg man injured in a motor vehicle collision (MVC) presents to
                                                        the emergency department somnolent, with multiple bruises and a large abdominal
                                                        laceration. At the time of the MVC, he was not wearing a seat belt and was catapulted
                                                        through the windshield of his car. His temperature is 36.7º C (98.1º F) heart rate is
                                                        135/min, blood pressure is 40 mm Hg over palpable, respiratory rate is 24/min, and
                                                        oxygen saturation is 99% on a nonrebreather mask with an FIO2 of 80%. On physical
                                                        exam, the patient has dry mucous membranes, sunken eyes, and doughy skin. An
                                                        abdominal CT reveals multiple broken ribs, a large liver laceration, and free ﬂuid in the
                                                        peritoneal cavity. His urine output has been 5 cc/hr since coming to the hospital. His
                                                        urine sediment shows reveals muddy brown granular and epithelial cell casts and free
                                                        epithelial cells.

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?      The two most common causes of acute kidney injury (AKI) in the
                                                                      setting of hypovolemia are prerenal azotemia and acute tubular injury
                                                                      (ATI; previously called acute tubular necrosis). Given the presence of
                                                                      epithelial cells and epithelial cell casts on urinalysis, the presumptive
                                                                      diagnosis is ATI (secondary to hypovolemic shock and prolonged
                                                                      hypoperfusion).

                             What is the pathogenesis of this        Renal diseases are classiﬁed as prerenal, due to lack of adequate renal
                              condition?                              perfusion; renal, due to intrinsic renal disease; or postrenal, due to
                                                                      obstruction to urine outﬂow. Renal hypoperfusion leading to decreased

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                      glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) is an example of prerenal disease;
                                                                      therefore, there is no damage to the renal tubules histologically. ATI
                                                                      results from either progression of prerenal disease (due to prolonged
                                                                      ischemia) or from toxic injury from drugs. Histologically, the kidney
                                                                      damage in toxic ATI manifests as necrosis and denuding of the
                                                                      tubular epithelium and occlusion of the tubular lumen by casts and
                                                                      cellular debris. Ischemic ATI manifests as ﬂattening of proximal
                                                                      tubular epithelial cells and regeneration changes, with occasional
                                                                      vacuolization of tubular cells.
                             What is the typical presentation of     The history will suggest hypovolemia or prolonged hypotension from
                              this condition?                         any cause (e.g., hemorrhage, diarrhea, vomiting, sepsis, intraoperative
                                                                      events). Alternatively, there will be a history of exposure to nephrotoxic
                                                                      substances (e.g., aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, IV contrast media).
                                                                      Physical exam would show signs consistent with hypovolemia,
                                                                      including tachycardia, dry mucous membranes, sunken eyes,
                                                                      orthostatic blood pressure changes, and decreased skin turgor.
                                                                      Patients with AKI can be oliguric or nonoliguric. Normal urine output
                                                                      for an adult is 0.5 cc/kg/hr. In the case of this patient, his urine output
                                                                      of 5 cc/hr was much lower than the expected 35 cc/hr for a 70-kg male.
                             What is the most appropriate            Both prerenal disease and ATI are treated by optimizing volume status
                              treatment for this condition?           and blood pressure with IV ﬂuids and pressor support to increase
                                                                      renal perfusion. When ATI is caused by nephrotoxic substances,
                                                                      management also includes removal of the offending agent.

                            464
 How are prerenal failure and                   Although the goals of treatment for both diseases are usually identical,
  this condition differentiated                  it is helpful to determine whether a patient has prerenal disease or
  clinically?                                    ATI for at least two reasons: (1) to gauge the severity of renal injury
                                                 and (2) to rule out nephrotoxic substance exposure as the cause of
                                                 the patient’s AKI. In prerenal disease, the urine sediment will appear
                                                 relatively normal, while in ATI, it will show necrosed tubular cells and
                                                 cell casts. Since the tubules are still functioning in prerenal disease,
                                                 the patient’s fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) is appropriately low
                                                 (i.e., the tubules will be appropriately reabsorbing sodium to maintain
                                                 intravascular volume), while in ATI the FENa is high due to loss of
                                                 the ability to reabsorb sodium. Similarly, urine sodium concentration
                                                 tends to be low (< 20 mEq/L) in prerenal disease, while it is high (> 40
                                                 mEq/L) in ATI. Furthermore, the blood urea nitrogen (BUN)/plasma
                                                 creatinine ratio is elevated in prerenal disease because of the increase
                                                 in passive absorption of urea that follows proximal reabsorption of
                                                 sodium and water. In contrast, this value is low in ATI because
                                                 functional tubules are required for proximal reabsorption of sodium
                                                 and water (see Table 16-1).
 What is the prognosis for patients             Nearly all patients with prerenal disease and most patients with ATI
  with this condition?                           spontaneously recover renal function if they are resuscitated in a
                                                 timely manner. In the case of ATI, prognosis depends on the severity
                                                 and duration of the untreated ischemia (or exposure to nephrotoxic

                                                                                                                               RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                 substances) and the patient’s underlying comorbidities (e.g., renal
                                                 disease, liver disease, cardiac disease, etc.).

TA B L E 16 - 1 .   Distinguishing ATI from Prerenal Disease

                                              PRERENAL DISEASE      ATI

   Causes                                     Hypovolemia           Hypovolemia (prolonged) or nephrotoxic substances

   Urine sediment                             Normal                Muddy brown granular and epithelial cell casts and free
                                                                    epithelial cells

   Fractional excretion of sodium (FENa)      < 1%                  > 2%

   Urine sodium concentration                 < 20 mEq/L            > 40 mEq/L

   BUN/plasma creatinine ratio                > 20:1                < 15:1

   Urine osmolality                           > 500 mOsm/kg         < 400 mOsm/kg

                                                                                                                         465
                             CASE 5                    A 68-year-old man presents to the emergency department with severe lower abdominal
                                                        pain. He has a constant desire to urinate but can produce only a small amount of urine.
                                                        His past medical history is unremarkable, but he says he has experienced hesitancy
                                                        before the onset of urination and decreased strength of his urinary stream for several
                                                        months. Physical examination is signiﬁcant for trace pedal edema, and his blood
                                                        pressure is 140/86 mm Hg, with no orthostatic changes. He has marked tenderness in
                                                        the suprapubic region and dullness to percussion to the level of the umbilicus. Rectal
                                                        examination reveals a large, smooth, ﬁrm, midline mass located anteriorly. Laboratory
                                                        tests show:
                                                        Sodium: 142 mEq/L
                                                        Potassium: 6.0 mEq/L
                                                        Chloride: 113 mEq/L
                                                        Bicarbonate: 17 mmol/L
                                                        Blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 110 mg/dL
                                                        Creatinine: 7 mg/dL
                                                        Hemoglobin: 15 g/dL
                                                        Hematocrit: 45%

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?      This is an example of postrenal (obstructive) acute renal failure. The
                                                                      patient’s chronic symptoms are suggestive of a partial bladder outlet
                                                                      obstruction. His acute symptoms suggest that the obstruction is now

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                      essentially complete. The suprapubic tenderness and dullness to
                                                                      percussion are due to a distended bladder. These signs and symptoms
                                                                      in elderly men are most commonly caused by benign prostatic
                                                                      hyperplasia, but prostate cancer must also be considered.

                             How do the laboratory ﬁndings           The elevations in BUN and creatinine levels indicate a signiﬁcant
                              help to conﬁrm the diagnosis?           reduction in glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR). This is due to the
                                                                      increased tubular hydrostatic pressure from the obstruction, which
                                                                      offsets glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure. The BUN:creatinine
                                                                      ratio is increased because of decreased ﬂow through the collecting
                                                                      duct, which causes enhanced urea reabsorption. The normal
                                                                      hemoglobin and hematocrit levels indicate that this is acute and not
                                                                      chronic renal failure, which almost always causes an anemia due to
                                                                      decreased bone marrow capacity.
                             What procedures and/or imaging          A catheter bypassing the obstruction may be placed in the bladder.
                              tools could be used to conﬁrm the       This is sometimes difﬁcult to do when the prostate is very enlarged. An
                              diagnosis?                              ultrasound of the kidneys would show dilated renal collecting ducts
                                                                      (hydronephrosis) and bilateral ureteral dilatation. A bladder scan would
                                                                      show a markedly enlarged bladder.
                             What is the most appropriate            Temporary relief may be achieved with a transurethral catheter, if
                              treatment for this condition?           possible. A suprapubic catheter should be considered if the size of the
                                                                      prostate prevents passage of a catheter. A transurethral prostatectomy
                                                                      is the deﬁnitive procedure. In addition, a workup to distinguish benign
                                                                      from malignant prostatic disease should be conducted.

                            466
 What are potential consequences   Postobstructive diuresis is typical after the relief of prolonged urinary
 of the treatment?                  tract obstruction. The magnitude of the diuresis can reach several liters
                                    per day, and one must make sure the patient is appropriately rehydrated
                                    to prevent signiﬁcant dehydration and worsening of the kidney
                                    injury. One mechanism for the diuresis is due to the elimination of
                                    sodium and water retained during the period of obstruction. Once
                                    the obstruction is removed, GFR increases and the excess sodium
                                    and water can be eliminated, which is a self-limiting process. Another
                                    mechanism is osmotic diuresis from retained urea, which is eliminated
                                    as GFR recovers.

                                                                                                                RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY

                                                                                                        467
                             CASE 6                     A 20-year-old woman with idiopathic membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
                                                         presents for her second visit to a nephrology clinic. In the course of 2 months,
                                                         her serum creatinine concentration has increased from 2.2 to 4.0 mg/dL. Despite
                                                         antihypertensive therapy with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor,
                                                         which was started after her ﬁrst visit, her blood pressure is 160/100 mm Hg. Her weight
                                                         is 67 kg (148 lb), up 1 kg (2.2 lb) from her last visit, and her legs are more edematous.
                                                         She has been experiencing tension headaches, which are relieved by nonsteroidal anti-
                                                         inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including ibuprofen and a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
                                                         inhibitor. She is also increasingly fatigued. Laboratory values from her ﬁrst and second
                                                         visits are listed below:

                                           NA+            K+            Cl–             HCO3–          BUN            CREATININE      HEMOGLOBIN
                                           (mEq/L)        (mEq/L)       (mEq/L)         (mmol/L)       (mg/dL)        (mg/dL)         (mg/dL)

                              Today        141            5.3           105             19             45             4.0             9.0

                              2 months     140            4.5           110             21             40             2.2             10.6
                              ago

                             Is the rise in serum creatinine          No; it represents a large decrement in glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR)

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                              consistent with a chronic renal          over a short period of time, which suggests an acute-on-chronic process.
                              disease process?

                             What are common causes of                Because a major determinant of GFR is glomerular capillary
                              acute-on-chronic renal failure in        hydrostatic pressure, a function of afferent and efferent arteriolar tone,
                              this type of situation?                  any factor that adversely affects this can cause acute renal failure.
                                                                       Such causes are systemic hypotension (a side effect of antihypertensive
                                                                       therapy), selective afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction (e.g., inhibition of
                                                                       prostaglandin E2), and selective efferent vasodilation (e.g., inhibition of
                                                                       angiotensin II).
                             What is the most likely cause of         She is hypertensive, has gained weight, and is edematous, all of
                              the increased serum creatinine in        which indicate she is not intravascularly volume depleted. However,
                              this patient?                            her glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure (and thus her GFR)
                                                                       is diminished because of her concurrent use of nonsteroidal anti-
                                                                       inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs; which reduce the synthesis of afferent
                                                                       arteriole dilating prostaglandins) and an angiotensin-converting
                                                                       enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (which prevents angiotensin II from
                                                                       adaptively constricting the efferent arteriole to compensate for the
                                                                       NSAID-induced afferent vasoconstriction). Stopping the NSAIDs
                                                                       should improve renal function.
                             How should her blood pressure            Poorly controlled hypertension is a major risk factor for the progression
                              be brought under control?                of renal disease. The recommended goal is 120–130/70–80 mm Hg.
                                                                       Adding another antihypertensive (e.g., β-blocker, calcium channel
                                                                       blocker, or diuretic) may be necessary to reach that goal.
                             What is her acid-base status?            She has an anion gap metabolic acidosis related to her renal failure.
                                                                       Decreased ammoniagenesis is the likely cause, but her GFR has fallen
                                                                       sufﬁciently for inorganic (e.g., phosphate, sulfate) and organic (e.g.,
                                                                       hippurate, urate) acids to be retained.

                            468
 What is the most likely cause of    A hemoglobin level below 10 mg/dL is a major cause of morbidity
  her fatigue, and how should it be   in patients with chronic kidney disease. Her anemia is most likely
  corrected?                          secondary to erythropoietin deﬁciency, but other causes, including
                                      iron deﬁciency, which is very common in chronic kidney disease
                                      patients and in menstruating young women, should be considered as
                                      well. Anemia associated with chronic kidney disease is a normocytic,
                                      normochromic, hypoproliferative anemia due to decreased
                                      erythropoietin production by the kidneys. She should be started on
                                      recombinant human erythropoietin (epoetin alfa) or darbepoetin alfa
                                      with the goal of maintaining her hemoglobin level between 11 and 12
                                      mg/dL.

                                                                                                             RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY

                                                                                                       469
                             CASE 7                     A 55-year-old man with past medical history signiﬁcant for hypertension presents to
                                                         his primary care physician with the chief complaint of sexual problems. He reports
                                                         gradual loss of the ability to have erections over the past year, including nocturnal and
                                                         morning erections. He reports being depressed because of the resulting loss of intimacy
                                                         with his wife, to whom he has been married for 30 years. He denies serious marital
                                                         problems. He denies any other medical problems including problems voiding, but does
                                                         report intermittent leg pain with exertion. He has not had any surgeries aside from a
                                                         tonsillectomy at age 12 and denies any genitourinary trauma. His medications include
                                                         amlodipine and aspirin. He has smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for the past 40
                                                         years but denies use of alcohol or illicit drugs. On examination, his pulse is 80/min,
                                                         and blood pressure is 138/88 mm Hg. His visual ﬁelds are intact. His heart, lung, and
                                                         abdominal examinations are within normal limits. He has normal radial pulses and
                                                         weak femoral, popliteal, and dorsalis pedis pulses bilaterally. His testicles are somewhat
                                                         asymmetric but normal in size. His cremasteric reﬂex is intact bilaterally. Examination
                                                         of the penis reveals no abnormalities in the shaft, no signs of balanitis in the glans, and
                                                         no phimosis. A digital rectal examination reveals a normal-sized prostate and normal
                                                         rectal tone.

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?        This patient has male impotence (also called erectile dysfunction),
                                                                        which is deﬁned as the inability to develop or sustain an erection 75%
                                                                        of the time. Gradual-onset impotence leading to complete loss of
                                                                        nocturnal and morning erections is due to either vascular or neurologic

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                        causes. Given the patient’s history of smoking and hypertension,
                                                                        claudication symptoms, diminished lower-extremity pulses, normal
                                                                        sphincter tone, and intact cremasteric reﬂex, the most likely cause of
                                                                        his impotence is peripheral vascular disease (PVD) (speciﬁcally aorto-
                                                                        iliac disease). A patient with purely neurologic impotence would be
                                                                        expected to have no claudication symptoms, normal peripheral pulses,
                                                                        absent or diminished cremasteric reﬂex, and possibly decreased anal
                                                                        sphincter tone if the neurologic cause of the impotence affected the
                                                                        S2–S4 nerves.

                             What conditions should be                 The differential diagnosis of male impotence is vast. The following
                              included in the differential              clinical ﬁndings provided a clue to the diagnosis:
                              diagnosis?                                 Rapid onset of impotence (“happened overnight”) is due to either
                                                                           psychogenic causes (e.g., conversion disorder) or genitourinary
                                                                           trauma (e.g., radical prostatectomy).
                                                                         Nonsustained erection (with detumescence after penetration) is due
                                                                           to either anxiety or vascular steal phenomenon.
                                                                         Certain medications can cause impotence, especially selective
                                                                           serotonin reuptake inhibitors, spironolactone, sympathetic blockers
                                                                           (e.g., clonidine), and thiazide diuretics.
                                                                         Impotence associated with gonadal atrophy is likely due to
                                                                           testosterone deﬁciency (secondary to hypogonadism).
                                                                         Phimosis (inability to retract the foreskin) points to underlying
                                                                           diabetes mellitus.
                                                                         Hard, plaquelike structures in the penile shaft suggest Peyronie’s
                                                                           disease.
                                                                        Other causes of impotence include: depression, hypo- and
                                                                        hyperthyroidism, prolactinoma, and Klinefelter’s syndrome.

                            470
 What is the most appropriate    Once the diagnosis of peripheral vascular disease is conﬁrmed with
  treatment for this condition?   ankle-brachial indices and duplex ultrasound of the lower extremities,
                                  treatment proceeds in a stepwise fashion, starting conservatively with
                                  diet and lifestyle modiﬁcations (i.e., smoking cessation and a walking
                                  exercise program). If conservative management does not result in
                                  clinical improvement, revascularization surgery (e.g., aorto-bifemoral
                                  bypass, iliac artery angioplasty, stenting, etc.) is considered.

                                                                                                           RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY

                                                                                                     471
                             CASE 8                     A 36-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with a 2-week history
                                                         of nonproductive cough, fatigue, and swelling in her legs. She reports that over the
                                                         past 3 days she has not been urinating as frequently as she normally does and that
                                                         her urine is darker than usual. Review of symptoms and past and family histories are
                                                         otherwise unremarkable. A routine employment physical 1 year ago showed a blood
                                                         pressure of 115/75 mm Hg and a normal urinalysis. Current physical examination
                                                         reveals hypertension (165/95 mm Hg) and peripheral edema, but otherwise is normal.
                                                         Laboratory testing reveals a serum creatinine level of 2.5 mg/dL. Urinalysis reveals a
                                                         speciﬁc gravity of 1.022, 4+ blood, 2+ protein, many RBCs, occasional WBCs, and
                                                         pigmented and RBC casts. She is admitted to the hospital for further workup; the
                                                         following day, her creatinine is 3.2 mg/dL.

                             What renal syndrome does this            Acute glomerulonephritis (GN), which is deﬁned as the sudden onset
                              patient have?                            of hematuria, proteinuria, and red blood cell casts. Because of the
                                                                       rapidly declining glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR), she would further be
                                                                       classiﬁed as having rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN).

                             What conditions should be                The differential diagnosis is extensive but can be broken down into
                              included in the differential             systemic or primary renal disease. In this patient, the nonproductive
                              diagnosis?                               cough suggests extrarenal disease, and the history would be compatible
                                                                       with Wegener’s granulomatosis, microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), or
                                                                       Goodpasture’s syndrome, which all involve both the lung and kidney.

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                       Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is another possibility.
                             What tests could be used to              Serum complement levels, antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-DNA
                              conﬁrm the diagnosis?                    antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and anti–
                                                                       glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibody serologies
                                                                       should be obtained (Table 16-2).
                             What are the typical ﬁndings on          Renal biopsy is the gold standard for diagnostic purposes in determining
                              microscopic analysis?                    the cause of GN. Crescents are a frequent cause of RPGN. They arise
                                                                       when breaks in the glomerular basement membrane result in release
                                                                       ﬁbrinogen into Bowman’s space, with subsequent ﬁbrin formation,
                                                                       inﬂux of macrophages and lymphocytes, and proliferation of the
                                                                       parietal epithelial cells. Crescentic GN is a lesion with multiple
                                                                       etiologies, including immune complex disease (e.g., postinfectious
                                                                       GN, systemic lupus erythematosus, and pauci-immune GN, which
                                                                       includes Wegener’s and MPA); and anti-GBM antibody-mediated GN
                                                                       (Goodpasture’s syndrome if lung is also involved).

                            472
TA B L E 16 - 2 .   Distinguishing Features of Common Causes of RPGN

                       SERUM                                                                                 ELECTRON
                       COMPLEMENT    CIRCULATING             LIGHT MICROSCOPE       IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE       MICROSCOPE
   CONDITION           LEVELS        AUTOANTIBODIES          FINDINGS               FINDINGS                 FINDINGS

   Anti-GBM            Normal        Anti-GBM antibodies     Uninvolved             Linear staining of       No deposits
                                     (to type IV collagen)   glomeruli normal,      GBM with anti-IgG        visible
                                                             crescents

   SLE                 Low C3 and    Anti-DNA                Endocapillary          “Sausage-like”           Lumpy deposits
                       CH50                                  proliferation, tram-   staining along GBM       subendothelial,
                                                             tracking, crescents    and mesangium for        mesangial
                                                                                    IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C1q

   Pauci-immune        Normal        Antineutrophil          Uninvolved             No staining              No deposits
   GN                                cytoplasmic antibody    glomeruli normal,                               visible
                                     (ANCA)                  crescents

                                                                                                                                 RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY

                                                                                                                           473
                             CASE 9                        A 48-year-old man presents to the emergency department with a 2-day history of
                                                            confusion and weakness. He has been complaining of back pain for the past 2 months
                                                            and has lost 9.1 kg (20 lb) over the past 6 months. He takes acetaminophen and
                                                            ibuprofen occasionally for his back pain. His past medical history is unremarkable. On
                                                            physical examination, the patient looks older than his stated age; his blood pressure
                                                            is 110/80 mm Hg while supine and 90/60 mm Hg when standing, and his heart
                                                            rate increases from 90/min to 112/min, respectively. The rest of his examination is
                                                            unremarkable except for mild muscular weakness. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as
                                                            follows:
                                                            Na+: 144 mEq/L         Creatinine: 2.1 mg/dL
                                                            K+: 4.2 mEq/L          Ca2+: 13.2 mg/dL
                                                              –
                                                            Cl : 98 mEq/L          Phosphorus: 3.4 mg/dL
                                                            HCO3–: 29 mmol/L       Albumin: 3.0 mg/dL
                                                            Blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 65 mg/dL

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?          Hypercalcemia of malignancy.

                             How should the workup proceed               Workup should be directed at determining the type and extent of
                              for this patient’s condition?               malignancy so that appropriate therapy can be instituted (Table 16-3).
                                                                          Note: The patient’s renal insufﬁciency and metabolic alkalosis are
                                                                          potential complications of chronic hypercalcemia.

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                             What is the most appropriate                Immediate therapy is required because he is symptomatic, and his
                              treatment for this patient?                 calcium level is > 13 mg/dL. Volume expansion with normal saline
                                                                          will increase the ﬁltered load of calcium and decrease proximal
                                                                          tubular calcium reabsorption. After intravascular volume is restored,
                                                                          a loop diuretic (e.g., furosemide) may be added to decrease calcium
                                                                          reabsorption in the thick ascending limb of Henle (remember: Loops
                                                                          Lose calcium). Bisphosphonates (pamidronate or etidronate) are the
                                                                          agents most commonly used to treat hypercalcemia of malignancy.
                                                                          They inhibit bone resorption and reach maximal effect in 7–10 days.

                            474
TA B L E 16 - 3 .    Cancer-Associated Mechanisms of Hypercalcemia

   MECHANISM                   FEATURES

   Vitamin D–secreting         Some lymphomas secrete calcitriol (1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D—i.e., the active form of Vitamin D),
   lymphomas                     which increases bone resorption and enhances calcium absorption from the gut.
                               Bone metastases are variable.
                               Predominant cause of hypercalcemia in Hodgkin’s disease and in one-third of patients with non-
                               Hodgkin’s lymphoma.

   Parathyroid hormone–        PTHrP increases bone resorption and enhances distal renal tubular reabsorption of calcium.
   related protein             Bone metastases are minimal or absent.
   (PTHrP)–secreting           Commonly associated malignancies include squamous cell tumors of the head and neck,
   tumors                        esophagus, cervix or lung and renal, ovarian, and endometrial carcinomas.

   Local osteolytic            Tumor metastases to bone release cytokines that stimulate osteoclast production and action.
   hypercalcemia               Tumors most commonly associated with bony metastases: breast, lung, lymphoma, thyroid, kidney,
                               prostate, and multiple myeloma (mnemonic: BL2T with a Kosher Pickle, Mustard, and Mayo).

   Ectopic                     Very rarely, some tumors will actually secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH).
   hyperparathyroidism

                                                                                                                                   RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
   Primary                     Cancer patients have a higher incidence of primary hyperparathyroidism than the general
   hyperparathyroidism         population; further, a serum PTH should always be obtained as part of the workup for
                               hypercalcemia.

                                                                                                                             475
                             CASE 10                    A 45-year-old man with a history of depression is brought to the emergency department
                                                         a few hours after ingesting 50 of his wife’s potassium supplement tablets in a suicide
                                                         attempt (each tablet contains 8 mEq of potassium). His physical examination is normal
                                                         except for mild hyporeﬂexia. Laboratory studies show a serum potassium concentration
                                                         of 7.0 mEq/L.

                             How is an acute potassium load           Cellular potassium uptake and renal potassium excretion are the
                              handled by the body?                     body’s major defenses against lethal hyperkalemia. Approximately
                                                                       40–50% of an acute load is excreted in the urine over 3–6 hours, with
                                                                       much of the remainder (~75%) being translocated into cells. Defects
                                                                       in renal excretion or cell uptake would produce proportionately greater
                                                                       rises in the plasma potassium concentration and would likely lead to
                                                                       cardiac arrest.

                             What are the typical                     A tall, peaked T wave with a shortened QT interval is the ﬁrst sign
                              electrocardiographic                     (Figure 16-1). With worsening hyperkalemia, the PR and QRS
                              manifestations of hyperkalemia?          intervals widen. The P wave may eventually disappear and the QRS
                                                                       eventually widens to a “sine wave” pattern (as the QRS complex
                                                                       merges with the T wave). This may ultimately progress to ventricular
                                                                       ﬁbrillation or asystole.
                             What therapies should be                 Listed in order of their rapidity of action, from fastest to slowest, the

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                              instituted for the emergent              treatments are:
                              treatment of severe hyperkalemia,         Calcium: Antagonizes the membrane effects of hyperkalemia
                              and what are their underlying               (mechanism unknown). Calcium is indicated only for severe
                              mechanisms?                                 hyperkalemia (i.e., as with widening of the QRS or loss of P waves,
                                                                          but not with peaked T waves alone). It acts within minutes but lasts
                                                                          less than an hour.
                                                                        Insulin and glucose: Insulin enhances the Na+/K+ ATPase pump
                                                                          in skeletal muscle, thereby driving potassium intracellularly.
                                                                          Effects are seen within 15–30 minutes and last for several hours.
                                                                          It is administered with a glucose drip or D50 injection to prevent
                                                                          hypoglycemia.
                                                                        Bicarbonate: Redistributes potassium into cells and may be
                                                                          particularly effective in patients with metabolic acidosis. Results may
                                                                          be seen in 30–60 minutes but it may take as long as a few hours.
                                                                        β2-adrenergic agonists (e.g., albuterol): Like insulin, they stimulate
                                                                          the Na+/K+ ATPase, which drives potassium intracellularly. They
                                                                          should be avoided in patients with known or suspected coronary
                                                                          disease because the high doses given to achieve effect can cause
                                                                          tachycardia.
                                                                        Loop or thiazide diuretics: Permanently excrete potassium out of
                                                                          the body into the urine.
                                                                        Cation-exchange resins (e.g., Kayexalate): Bind up potassium in the
                                                                          gut, removing it from the body.
                                                                       Patients with renal insufﬁciency may require emergent dialysis.

                            476
FIGURE 16-1.       ECG manifestations of hyperkalemia. Wide QRS complexes are followed by
peaked T waves (best seen in V3). (Reproduced, with permission, from Fuster V, Alexander RW,
O’Rourke RA, eds; Roberts R, King SB III, Nash IS, Prystowsky EN, assoc. eds. Hurst’s The Heart,

                                                                                                   RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. B-33.)

                                                                                            477
                             CASE 11                    A 79-year-old woman who resides in a nursing home is brought to the hospital
                                                         because of decreased mental acuity. She had been doing well until she developed a
                                                         fever associated with an upper respiratory infection. She ate poorly and over 3 days
                                                         became less responsive. She had been treated with antibiotics but not intravenous
                                                         ﬂuids. Physical examination reveals an obtunded elderly woman with a blood pressure
                                                         of 110/78 mm Hg supine, 108/80 mm Hg sitting up in bed, heart rate of 96/min,
                                                         respiratory rate of 20/min, and temperature of 39.1° C (102.4° F). She has poor skin
                                                         turgor, her chest is clear to auscultation bilaterally, and her heart rhythm is regular
                                                         with no murmurs or gallops; she has no abdominal masses and no peripheral edema.
                                                         Laboratory studies are as follows:
                                                         Na+: 167 mEq/L             Creatinine: 1.0 mg/dL
                                                         K+: 4.3 mEq/L              Glucose: 100 mg/dL
                                                         Cl–: 105 mEq/L             Hemoglobin: 18.1 g/dL
                                                         HCO3–: 24 mmol/L           Urine osmolality: 550 mOsm/kg
                                                         BUN: 40 mg/dL

                             How do the history, physical              This information all points to excessive extrarenal water losses and
                              examination, and laboratory               inadequate water intake. Losses are incurred in this patient due to
                              data help in identifying the              insensible losses associated with fever. It is estimated that for each
                              pathophysiologic mechanisms               0.6° C (1.0° F) increase in body temperature above 37.8° C
                              responsible for the hypernatremia?        (100.0° F), an additional 1000 mL of electrolyte-free water is lost as

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                        sweat. Normally, insensible losses average 500 mL/day. Obtundation
                                                                        has decreased her thirst perception, which would normally drive
                                                                        water intake when serum sodium reaches the upper limits of normal
                                                                        (145 mEq/L). The elevated BUN and hemoglobin levels are due to
                                                                        hemoconcentration.

                             What has caused the patient’s             Electrolyte-free water is lost in proportion to the normal distribution of
                              mental status change?                     water between the extra- and intracellular ﬂuid compartments. Since
                                                                        two-thirds of the body’s water is in the intracellular compartment,
                                                                        most of the losses are incurred there, causing cellular dehydration and
                                                                        altered mental status. Cerebral dehydration initially causes confusion
                                                                        and obtundation and can progress to seizures or coma.
                             If her urine osmolality were 150          A high urine osmolality indicates the kidneys are conserving water
                              mOsm/kg, what other conditions            appropriately in response to the hypernatremia. A low osmolality in
                              should be considered as potential         this case would indicate renal instead of extrarenal electrolyte-free
                              causes for her hypernatremia?             water loss. Renal losses are associated with less-than-maximal urine
                                                                        osmolality, and extrarenal losses are accompanied by maximal levels
                                                                        (generally > 500 mOsm/kg in hospitalized patients). Central or
                                                                        nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can cause hypernatremia if associated
                                                                        with decreased thirst perception and/or decreased access to water.
                             What is the most appropriate              Oral rehydration is the preferred method of electrolyte-free water
                              treatment for this patient’s              repletion. That is not possible for this patient because of her
                              hypernatremia?                            obtunded state, so intravenous 5% dextrose in water should be used.
                                                                        Approximately 50% of the water deﬁcit should be repleted in the ﬁrst
                                                                        24 hours, and the remainder corrected over the next 24–48 hours. Too
                                                                        rapid correction may lead to cerebral edema due to the accumulation
                                                                        of idiogenic osmoles within brain cells that have served to defend
                                                                        against cell volume contraction.

                            478
 CASE 12                    A 37-year-old hypertensive obese man with a 1 week history of productive cough,
                             fever, and chills becomes progressively more obtunded and on day 7 is brought to
                             the emergency department, where he has a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. Physical
                             examination reveals a blood pressure of 90/60 mm Hg, heart rate of 100/min, and
                             temperature of 37.9° C (100.2° F). He responds to his name but is lethargic, has
                             decreased skin turgor, no axillary sweat, no peripheral edema, and no focal neurologic
                             signs. There is dullness to percussion and decreased lungs sounds in the right lower
                             lobe of his lungs. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings are as follows:
                             Na+: 135 mEq/L             Blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 40mg/dL
                             K+: 3.5 mEq/L              Creatinine: 1.6 mg/dL
                             Cl–: 100 mEq/L             Glucose: 1200 mg/dL
                             CO2: 24 mEq/L              Urinalysis: 4+ glucose, negative for ketones

 Given the low serum sodium               This patient is hypertonic based on the following calculation: Plasma
  concentration, is this patient           tonicity = 2 [Na] + [glucose]/18 = 370 mOsm/kg. Urea is not included
  hypo- or hypertonic?                     in the calculation of plasma tonicity, since it is an ineffective solute that
                                           equilibrates between extracellular and intracellular ﬂuid.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?       Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS; previously called
                                           hyperosmolar hyperglycemic nonketotic coma), in this case caused by
                                           severe hypertonicity. In hypertonic states, ﬂuid is shifted out of cells,

                                                                                                                           RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                           leading to intravascular volume depletion, manifested by tachycardia
                                           and hypotension; it also causes cellular dehydration, which leads to
                                           mental status changes, decreased tissue turgor, and decreased axillary
                                           sweat.
 How does this patient’s                  DKA is characterized by the triad of hyperglycemia, ketonemia,
  presentation differ from diabetic        and wide anion gap metabolic acidosis. Although the patient has
  ketoacidosis (DKA)?                      hyperglycemia, his anion gap is normal and his urinalysis is negative for
                                           ketones.
 What precipitated this crisis?           HHS is most commonly seen in either obese or elderly individuals,
                                           without a previous history of diabetes mellitus, who develop insulin
                                           resistance. Insulin resistance is precipitated by severe infections
                                           (pneumonia in this patient), pancreatitis, burns, surgical stress,
                                           corticosteroids, and hyperalimentation.
 What is the patient’s corrected          This is the concentration that would be expected if the serum glucose
  sodium level?                            concentration were normal (i.e., reduced to 100 mg/dL). To calculate
                                           this, for each 100 mg/dL that the plasma glucose is increased over
                                           100 mg/dL, increase the sodium by 2.4 mEq/L. With a glucose
                                           concentration of 1800 mg/dL, multiply 2.4 by 17 = 41 mEq/L, and add
                                           the product to the measured sodium concentration: (135 mEq/L+ 41
                                           mEq/L =176 mEq/L). This provides a better estimate of the patient’s
                                           true water deﬁcit.
 What is the ﬁrst step in managing        The ﬁrst priority is to restore intravascular volume with intravenous
  this patient’s ﬂuid and electrolyte      normal saline. This must be done before treating the hyperglycemia.
  abnormalities?                           Giving insulin, which will cause glucose to move into cells, before
                                           correcting the volume status will cause further extracellular ﬂuid
                                           contraction and could precipitate hypovolemic shock.

                                                                                                                   479
                             CASE 13                   A 43-year-old woman presents with a fractured rib. She has diffuse bone pain and
                                                        difﬁculty combing her hair, rising from a chair, and climbing stairs. She states she
                                                        has had foul-smelling, bulky stools and has lost about 4.5 kg (10 lb) over the past 6
                                                        months, though her appetite has been normal. She has high calcium intake and normal
                                                        sun exposure. She takes a multivitamin daily. Physical examination shows a normal
                                                        abdomen, proximal muscle weakness, and tenderness over the spine and ribs. She walks
                                                        with a waddling gait. Neurologic examination is otherwise normal. Blood studies show
                                                        normal electrolytes, renal function, and liver function. Other pertinent laboratory data
                                                        are as follows:
                                                        Calcium: 7.5 mg/dL
                                                        Phosphorus: 1.6 mg/dL
                                                        Magnesium: 1.3 mg/dL (normal: 1.5–2.0 mg/dL)
                                                        Albumin: 3.2 mg/dL
                                                        Parathyroid hormone (PTH): 96 pg/mL (normal: 10–55 pg/mL)
                                                        Calcidiol: 5 ng/mL (normal: 8–15 ng/mL)

                             What are the possible causes of          It is due in part to hypoalbuminemia; the corrected serum calcium
                              hypocalcemia?                            is calculated by adding 0.8 × (the difference between normal and
                                                                       measured albumin) to the measured calcium level = 7.5 + 0.8 × (4.0 –
                                                                       3.2) = 8.1 mg/dL. This value is still below the normal serum calcium
                                                                       range, indicating the presence of clinically signiﬁcant hypocalcemia.

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                       Magnesium deﬁciency can cause hypocalcemia, but only when
                                                                       magnesium levels are < 1.2 mg/dL. Renal function is normal, so renal
                                                                       failure cannot explain the hypocalcemia.

                             What are the possible causes of          This may be caused by a nutritional deﬁciency, sunlight deprivation,
                              low calcidiol levels?                    malabsorption, impaired vitamin D metabolism, or excretion of
                                                                       vitamin D in the urine. Malabsorption (the likely culprit in this
                                                                       patient) can be due to intestinal disease, as in inﬂammatory bowel
                                                                       disease or celiac sprue. Chronic liver disease impairs the conversion of
                                                                       vitamin D to calcidiol, the substrate for the kidney’s production of the
                                                                       active form of vitamin D, calcitriol.
                             What would a bone biopsy show?           It would show osteomalacia due to low circulating calcium and
                                                                       phosphate and the absence of the anabolic effects of vitamin D on
                                                                       bone. Looser’s lines are symmetric bilateral pseudofractures and are
                                                                       pathognomonic for osteomalacia (Figure 16-2).
                             What is the most appropriate             Treatment includes vitamin D and oral calcium. Since there is no
                              treatment for this condition?            defect in the conversion of calcidiol to calcitriol, either vitamin D2
                                                                       (ergocalciferol) or calcidiol is appropriate.

                            480
FIGURE 16-2.       Radiograph of the scapula in a patient with phosphaturia
as a cause of osteomalacia. Looser’s zone (or pseudofracture) is indicated
by the arrow. (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Braunwald E,

                                                                                RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
Fauci AS, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, Issselbacher J, et al. Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005: Fig.
331.6.)

                                                                          481
                             CASE 14                    A 55-year-old man with a past medical history of hypertension and congestive heart
                                                         failure presents to the emergency department with a 1-day history of right ﬂank pain,
                                                         nausea, and vomiting. The pain was initially mild a few hours ago but progressed
                                                         gradually over the course of 30 minutes to severe pain, followed by nausea and vomiting
                                                         several times. The pain now radiates to his right testicle. He denies any history of recent
                                                         trauma. On examination, his temperature is 36.7° C (98.0° F), pulse is 90/min, blood
                                                         pressure is 140/72 mm Hg, and respiratory rate is 14/min. He is lying in bed, doubled
                                                         over in pain. Auscultation of his heart reveals a normal S1 and S2 with an S3 gallop
                                                         and no murmurs or rubs. He has faint crackles in the bases of both lungs. His abdomen
                                                         is soft, nondistended, and somewhat tender in the right ﬂank area, without guarding
                                                         or rebound tenderness and with normal bowel sounds present. No abdominal or ﬂank
                                                         masses are appreciated. He has pitting edema to the ankles bilaterally. In the hour since
                                                         coming to the hospital, he has put out 50 cc of pinkish urine. His medications include
                                                         metoprolol, furosemide, captopril, amlodipine, and aspirin.

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?        A history of progressively worsening ﬂank pain over a period of an
                                                                        hour combined with hematuria is highly suggestive of nephrolithiasis.
                                                                        Radiation of the pain to the groin (testicle or labia) suggests migration
                                                                        of the stone to the lower third of the ureter. The differential diagnosis of
                                                                        abdominal pain that progresses over a similar time course and pattern
                                                                        of radiation includes aortic dissection, lumbar disk disease, renal
                                                                        infarction, and intestinal disease. The differential of gross hematuria

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                        includes renal malignancy, infection, glomerulonephritis, and trauma.

                             Which of the patient’s                    Loop diuretics such as furosemide increase the concentration of
                              medications likely precipitated           calcium in the urine, thereby increasing the risk of calcium stone
                              his current symptoms?                     formation. Speciﬁcally, they inhibit the co-transport of Na+, Cl-, and
                                                                        K+ at the luminal membrane of the thick ascending limb of the loop of
                                                                        Henle, effectively decreasing the driving force for the reabsorption of
                                                                        Mg2+ and Ca2+ (“Loops Lose Calcium”).
                             What laboratory and imaging               The workup to evaluate suspected nephrolithiasis is as follows:
                              tools are used to evaluate this            Urinalysis and urine sediment: To determine urine pH and evaluate
                              condition?                                  the urine for crystals, because certain types of kidney stones are
                                                                          associated with speciﬁc urine pH and crystal ﬁndings. For instance,
                                                                          calcium stones (which account for ~80% of all kidney stones) tend to
                                                                          arise in alkaline environments (urine pH > 6) and generate the urine
                                                                          sediment ﬁndings seen in Figure 16-1.
                                                                         Plain ﬁlm of the abdomen: To look for radiopaque stones (90% of all
                                                                          renal stones).
                                                                         Helical CT: When a plain ﬁlm of the abdomen is inconclusive,
                                                                          but the clinical suspicion is high, helical CT has become the gold
                                                                          standard for diagnosing renal stones and ruling out alternative
                                                                          diagnoses (e.g., appendicitis, diverticulitis, aortic aneurysm, etc.).
                             What is the most appropriate              The initial treatment consists of providing adequate hydration and pain
                              treatment for this condition?             relief. Additionally, the patient’s loop diuretic should be replaced with
                                                                        a thiazide (e.g., hydrochlorothiazide), a diuretic that actually increases
                                                                        calcium reabsorption from the renal tubules while still providing potent
                                                                        diuresis for the patient’s congestive heart failure. Small stones (< 5 mm)
                                                                        often pass on their own. Larger stones sometimes need to be removed
                                                                        with a urological procedure (e.g., extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy,
                                                                        retrograde ureteroscopy, percutaneous lithotripsy, or open lithotripsy).

                            482
 CASE 15                    A 62-year-old man develops sudden onset pain in his right foot. On further inspection,
                             he notices that his foot is cold and blue, and he is taken to the emergency department.
                             His past medical history is signiﬁcant for osteoarthritis of his knees, which limits his
                             mobility. He takes nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which help the
                             pain. On physical examination, his blood pressure is 145/90 mm Hg, heart rate is
                             92/min, and temperature is 37° C (98.6° F). His right foot is cool and pulseless, and
                             there is 2+ pitting edema to the knees bilaterally. Urinalysis reveals a speciﬁc gravity of
                             1.026, 1+ blood, 3+ protein, occasional RBCs, and occasional hyaline casts.

 What is the most likely cause of          The cool, pulseless, cyanotic foot indicates severely compromised
  the patient’s lower extremity signs       blood ﬂow to the right lower extremity. Patients with nephrotic
  and symptoms?                             syndrome lose both procoagulant proteins and anticoagulant proteins
                                            in the urine, and some patients develop either arterial or venous
                                            thromboses. This patient has developed an arterial thrombosis as a
                                            consequence of spilling anticoagulant proteins in his urine.

 What primary renal diseases can           A wide variety of systemic diseases and a more limited number of
  cause this condition?                     renal diseases can cause nephrotic syndrome. Focal segmental
                                            glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), minimal change disease (MCD), and
                                            membranous nephropathy (MBN) make up the majority of the
                                            primary renal diseases presenting as nephrotic syndrome in adults.

                                                                                                                           RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
 What systemic diseases cause this         Diabetes mellitus, systemic lupus erythematosus, amyloidosis,
  condition?                                malignancy (lymphoma, adenocarcinoma), and viral infections (e.g.,
                                            hepatitis, HIV) can all cause a nephrotic syndrome.
 How should the workup proceed             Evaluation and treatment of the suspected arterial thrombosis is the
  for this patient’s condition?             top priority. Given the increased incidence of renal vein thrombosis
                                            in patients with nephrotic syndrome, renal angiography should
                                            be considered as part of the radiologic evaluation. In addition, the
                                            proteinuria should be quantiﬁed, creatinine clearance measured,
                                            and other characteristics typical of nephrotic syndrome sought
                                            (hypoalbuminemia and hyperlipidemia). Serologic evaluation should
                                            include tests for hepatitis B and C and HIV. NSAIDs and malignancy
                                            have been associated both with MCD and MBN, and in this elderly
                                            gentleman age-appropriate cancer screening should be performed.
 What are the typical ﬁndings on            FSGS: By light microscopy, segmental areas of sclerosis in some but
  renal biopsy?                               not all glomeruli, negative immunoﬂuorescence (IF), foot process
                                              effacement by electron microscopy (EM).
                                             MCD: Histologically normal glomeruli by light microscopy; foot
                                              process effacement by EM.
                                             MBN: Basement membrane thickening with little or no cellular
                                              proliferation or inﬁltration by light microscopy; capillary loop
                                              deposits by IF with corresponding subepithelial deposits by EM.
 In addition to                            Patients with nephrotic syndrome are at increased risk for anasarca,
  thromboemebolism, what are                hypoalbuminemia, and hypogammaglobulinemia (loss of protein in
  other potential complications of          urine), with consequent increased infection risk and hypovolemia (may
  this condition?                           rarely cause acute renal failure due to volume shifts).

                                                                                                                     483
                             CASE 16                    A 56-year-old man presents to the emergency department following an episode of
                                                         hematuria. He reports continuous bilateral ﬂank pain and progressive worsening of
                                                         fatigue, malaise, and nausea for the past several months, but he is uninsured and has
                                                         not been able to seek medical care. When questioned, he states that he has been
                                                         urinating less than previously. He believes his father suffered from something similar
                                                         but is unclear on the details. His temperature is 36.9° C (98.4° F), heart rate is 88/min,
                                                         and blood pressure is 168/99 mm Hg. There are bilateral masses palpated on abdominal
                                                         exam. Laboratory ﬁndings include blood urea nitrogen of 64 mg/dL and creatinine of
                                                         3.1 mg/dL.

                             What tests and/or imaging tools           This patient is in renal failure. From this initial assessment, it is
                              could be used next to conﬁrm the          difﬁcult to say whether this is an acute process or sudden worsening
                              diagnosis?                                of chronic kidney disease. Causes of acute kidney injury should be
                                                                        eliminated (i.e., dehydration) before initiating dialysis therapy for
                                                                        his symptoms. The next steps in the workup would be a urinalysis
                                                                        and renal ultrasound or abdominal CT (which would have to be
                                                                        performed without contrast due to his renal failure), followed by biopsy
                                                                        if necessary.

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?        Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). This is
                                                                        a genetic condition marked by cyst formation in the kidneys, liver,
                                                                        spleen, and pancreas, leading to progressive worsening of kidney

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                        function with age. It is estimated that 2% of patients require dialysis by
                                                                        the age of 40, 20% by age 50, 40% by age 60, and 60% by age 70. Pain
                                                                        and hematuria are the most common presenting symptoms.
                             What is the pathogenesis of this          ADPKD is due to a genetic mutation, either in the polycystin 1 gene
                              condition?                                (PKD1) on chromosome 16 or in the polycystin 2 gene (PKD2) on
                                                                        chromosome 4. Generally speaking, PKD2 is less severe than PKD1,
                                                                        but neither disease is benign. Cysts form in a relatively small number
                                                                        of nephrons, so the mechanism of kidney failure is not entirely
                                                                        understood; the development of vascular sclerosis and interstitial
                                                                        ﬁbrosis contributes.
                             What risk factors are associated           Younger age at diagnosis (earlier onset of symptoms)
                              with an increased incidence of             Male gender
                              this condition?                            Gross hematuria
                                                                         Hypertension
                                                                         Proteinuria
                                                                         Kidney size

                             What is the most appropriate              Management focuses on decreasing progression to end-stage renal
                              treatment for this condition?             disease (ESRD). Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are very common in
                                                                        these patients and must be treated quickly to prevent cyst infection.
                                                                        Tight blood pressure control, often with angiotensin-converting
                                                                        enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, also helps to prevent further kidney damage.
                                                                        Percutaneous drainage of large cysts may reduce pain but does not
                                                                        affect kidney function. Patients with ESRD are managed with dialysis
                                                                        or renal transplantation, typically with good results.

                            484
 This condition is associated with      Patients with ADPKD have an increased incidence of aneurysms
  an increased risk of what other        at the circle of Willis, known as berry aneurysms. Risk of rupture is
  conditions?                            exacerbated by uncontrolled hypertension. Mitral valve prolapse and
                                         diverticulosis are also frequently seen in these patients. Despite the
                                         presence of cysts in the liver, hepatic dysfunction is rare.
 If similar ﬁndings of cystic disease   Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). This is a less
  were seen in an infant, what           common but more severe form of the disease that presents in infants
  would be the likely diagnosis?         and young children. These patients suffer liver cirrhosis and portal
                                         hypertension in addition to renal failure; this condition is often fatal in
                                         the ﬁrst few years of life.

                                                                                                                       RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY

                                                                                                                485
                             CASE 17                       A 44-year-old man with no signiﬁcant past medical history presents to his primary
                                                            care physician with a 3-month history of left ﬂank pain. The pain is dull in character,
                                                            constant, and has become progressively worse over time. Over the past week, he has also
                                                            noticed a pink hue to his urine. He denies any history of trauma in the past year. On
                                                            examination, his temperature is 37.2° C (99.0° F), pulse is 88/min, and blood pressure
                                                            is 110/74 mm Hg. His heart and lung examinations are within normal limits. A palpable
                                                            mass is noted in his left abdominal/ﬂank region. The mass is ﬁrm, nontender, and
                                                            moves with respiration. The rest of the abdomen is soft, nontender, nondistended, and
                                                            with normal bowel sounds. Fullness is also noted in his left scrotum when the patient is
                                                            recumbent. The fullness permits light penetration on transillumination.

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?          The triad of (1) hematuria, (2) ﬂank pain, and (3) a palpable
                                                                          abdominal/renal mass is classic for renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
                                                                          Although it is found in less than 10% of patients with RCC, when it
                                                                          occurs, the presence of this triad is a marker of locally advanced disease
                                                                          (“too-late triad”). Hematuria occurs only with tumor invasion of the
                                                                          collecting system. Any patient with hematuria who presents with blood
                                                                          clots in their urine should be rigorously evaluated for cancer, because
                                                                          clot formation does not occur with glomerular bleeding (e.g., nephritic
                                                                          syndrome or rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis).

                             Why does the patient most likely            A minority of patients (~10%) with left-sided RCC will have left-sided

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                              have left scrotal fullness?                 scrotal varicoceles due to tumor obstruction of the left gonadal vein as
                                                                          it enters the left renal vein.
                             What other symptoms are                     Other possible ﬁndings include: symptoms resulting from IVC
                              common in patients with this                invasion/obstruction (lower-extremity edema, ascites, hepatomegaly,
                              condition?                                  etc.), paraneoplastic syndromes (from ectopic production of any
                                                                          number of hormones—e.g., hypercalcemia from parathyroid-
                                                                          like hormone, Cushing’s from adrenocorticotropic hormone–like
                                                                          substance, hypertension from renin, erythrocytosis from erythropoietin,
                                                                          etc.), anemia, hepatic dysfunction, intermittent fever, weight loss, night
                                                                          sweats, and cachexia.
                             What risk factors are associated            Patients at increased risk for RCC include those with certain inherited
                              with an increased incidence of              conditions (including Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome and tuberous
                              this condition?                             sclerosis), end-stage renal disease, adult polycystic kidney disease,
                                                                          a strong family history of RCC, and prior kidney irradiation.
                             What is the most appropriate next           Patients with unexplained hematuria or other signs and/or symptoms
                              step in management?                         suspicious for RCC must undergo radiologic evaluation of their
                                                                          kidneys. The evaluation begins with a renal ultrasound to differentiate
                                                                          simple benign cysts from complex cysts and solid tumors. The ﬁnding
                                                                          of a simple cyst on ultrasound effectively rules out RCC, whereas the
                                                                          ﬁnding of complex cysts or a solid mass mandates further evaluation
                                                                          with an abdominal CT. A deﬁnitive diagnosis is obtained through
                                                                          histological evaluation via either a biopsy (rarely) or a nephrectomy or
                                                                          partial nephrectomy (more commonly).

                            486
 CASE 18                    A 64-year-old woman with a long history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension presents
                             to her primary care physician for an annual checkup. Laboratory studies reveal a
                             potassium level of 5.5 mEq/L. Repeat laboratory studies include serum electrolytes and
                             an arterial blood gas. Relevant ﬁndings are as follows:
                             Na+: 143 mEq/L           Creatinine: 1.6 mg/dL
                             K+: 5.4 mEq/L            Arterial blood gas:
                             Cl–: 115 mEq/L           pH: 7.36
                             HCO3–: 21 mmol/L         PcO2: 33
                             BUN: 30 mg/dL            Po2: 90
                             Additionally, plasma renin and aldosterone are both decreased.

 What is the cause of this patient’s      She has type IV renal tubular acidosis (RTA), characterized by
  acidosis?                                hyperkalemia and a hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. This is
                                           often seen in patients with diabetes mellitus and mild-to-moderate
                                           renal insufﬁciency. It is also seen in some patients who are taking
                                           nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, angiotensin-converting enzyme
                                           (ACE) inhibitors, cyclosporine/tacrolimus, or potassium-sparing
                                           diuretics. Patients who have interstitial renal diseases such as systemic
                                           lupus erythematosus, obstructive uropathy, and sickle cell disease or
                                           HIV nephropathy may also be affected.

                                                                                                                       RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
 What is the mechanism behind             The basic defect is decreased potassium secretion by the distal tubule.
  this condition?                          It can result from hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism or from an
                                           unresponsiveness of the renal tubule to aldosterone. A functional
                                           decrease in aldosterone activity reduces distal tubular reabsorption
                                           of sodium, thus reducing secretion of potassium and H+. The
                                           hyperkalemia inhibits ammonium production by the renal tubules,
                                           thus further inhibiting the excretion of H+ into the urine and causing
                                           the acidosis. In spite of the aldosterone deﬁciency, most patients
                                           have normal sodium levels because there is no hypovolemia-induced
                                           stimulation of ADH release.
 What was her predisposing risk           Diabetic patients can have low plasma renin activity due to an
  factor?                                  acquired defect in the conversion of the precursor prorenin to active
                                           renin.
 How do distal and proximal RTAs          Distal (type I) RTA is characterized by decreased net H+ secretion in
  differ from type IV RTA?                 the collecting ducts. Urine pH remains elevated in the presence of a
                                           metabolic acidosis, regardless of the degree of lowered serum HCO3.
                                           Consequently, urine cannot be lowered beyond a pH of 5.3. Serum
                                           potassium levels may be high or low.
                                           In proximal (type II) RTA, the principal defect is in HCO3 reabsorption
                                           in the proximal tubule. It presents as a hyperchloremic, hypokalemic
                                           metabolic acidosis. Urine pH is normal initially, but falls below 5.3
                                           once the serum has become acidic.
 What is the most appropriate             Type IV RTA usually does not require therapy as long as there is no
  treatment for this condition?            extracellular volume contraction. Some patients, however, will require
                                           potassium-wasting diuretics such as furosemide. A few may need
                                           mineralocorticoid replacement therapy to correct the hyperkalemia.

                                                                                                                 487
                             CASE 19                     A 30-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of hyperlipidemia presents for evaluation
                                                          of persistent hypertension. She was diagnosed with high blood pressure 18 months
                                                          ago and was started on metoprolol, which did not signiﬁcantly lower her pressures. A
                                                          few months later, hydrochlorothiazide was added to her regimen, also with limited
                                                          results. One week ago, she was started on captopril. She denies any symptoms from her
                                                          hypertension, including palpitations, episodes of unexpected sweating, and headaches.
                                                          She has no family history of hypertension and does not use oral contraceptives. She has
                                                          smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for the past 10 years, does not use alcohol, and
                                                          lives a sedentary lifestyle but denies alcohol use. Today, on examination, her pulse is
                                                          80/min; blood pressure is 152/90 mm Hg and relatively equal in all extremities. She has
                                                          a normal, healthy body habitus. Her heart, lung, and abdominal examinations are all
                                                          within normal limits. Her thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level is 2.9. The results
                                                          of her two most recent basic metabolic panels are as follows:

                                            NA+            K+            CL–            HCO3–           CREATININE     BUN             GLUCOSE
                              DATE          (mEq/L)        (mEq/L)       (mEq/L)        (mmol/L)        (mg/dL)        (mg/dL)         (mg/dL)

                              Today         138            4.1           105            24              1.6            33              102

                              One week      139            4.0           103            24              1.1            20              105
                              ago

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                             What is the most likely diagnosis?        This patient has several clues suggestive of secondary (i.e.,
                                                                        nonessential) hypertension: hypertension refractory to three or more
                                                                        medications (including a diuretic), age of onset < 30, and no family
                                                                        history or other risk factors (e.g., obesity, alcohol abuse). Other features
                                                                        of secondary hypertension include proven age of onset before puberty
                                                                        and hypertension arising acutely in a person with previously stable
                                                                        blood pressures. In this setting, the acute rise in the patient’s plasma
                                                                        creatinine after institution of therapy with an angiotensin converting
                                                                        enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) is suggestive of renal artery stenosis (RAS;
                                                                        also called renovascular hypertension). Angiotensin II preferentially
                                                                        constricts the efferent renal arterioles that, in the setting of RAS,
                                                                        maintain intraglomerular pressure and thus the glomerular ﬁltration
                                                                        rate (GFR). By decreasing the levels of angiotensin II, ACE inhibitors
                                                                        eliminate efferent vasoconstriction and cause a decrease in the GFR.
                                                                        Additionally, although abdominal bruits are highly speciﬁc for RAS,
                                                                        they are not very sensitive screening tools for this condition, so the
                                                                        absence of bruits on auscultation does not rule out RAS (Table 16-4).

                             What is the most likely etiology          The most likely underlying cause of RAS in a young woman is
                              of this condition in this patient’s       ﬁbromuscular dysplasia, a disorder that affects both renal arteries
                              case?                                     and leads to a “string of beads appearance” on digital subtraction
                                                                        angiography.

                            488
 What is the most appropriate                   She should receive medications. ACEI may be beneﬁcial in this disease
  treatment for this condition?                  and considered ﬁrst line of therapy, as long as there is close monitoring
                                                 of potassium and creatinine levels. A rise in serum creatinine of 0.5–1.0
                                                 mg/dL is acceptable after initiating therapy with ACEI, and is expected
                                                 based on ACEI’s mode of action. A thiazide diuretic should be added if
                                                 BP is still not decreased to goal levels to help control her blood pressure
                                                 and hyperlipidemia. She should be encouraged to stop smoking and
                                                 to exercise. If medical management fails, she should be evaluated for
                                                 an operative intervention (e.g., percutaneous transluminal angioplasty
                                                 with or without vascular stent placement).

TA B L E 16 - 4 .   Major Causes of Secondary Hypertension

   CONDITION                      CLINICAL FEATURES

   Renal artery stenosis          Acute rise in plasma creatinine after administration of ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor
                                    blocker.
                                  Hypertension in a person with diffuse atherosclerosis or a single small kidney.
                                  Variable presence of abdominal bruit or bruits across other vascular beds.

   Pheochromocytoma               Paroxysmal elevations in blood pressure.
                                  Tachycardia, Sweating, and Headaches (See Endocrine Case 16, “TSH” = pheochromocytoma).

                                                                                                                                         RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
   Primary hyperaldosteronism     For exam purposes, patients with Conn’s syndrome will have hypokalemia due to renal
   (Conn’s syndrome)                potassium wasting (in reality, however, over half of Conn’s patients are normokalemic).
                                  Weakness, paralysis, and/or paresthesias.

   Cushing’s syndrome             Moon facies, acne, suprclavicular fat pads, abdominal striae, and central obesity.

   Coarctation of the aorta       Hypertension in both arms or just right arm (if left subclavian artery is distal to the coarctation)
                                  and low pressures in both legs with diminished femoral pulses.

   Oral contraceptives (OCPs)     Hypertension whose onset temporally coincides with the start of OCP use.

   Hypothyroidism                 Symptomatic hypothyroidism or elevated serum thyroid-stimulating hormone.

                                                                                                                                  489
                             CASE 20                   A 23-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with an enlarged right
                                                        scrotum. He ﬁrst noticed a “fullness” in his scrotum 2 months ago when he sprained his
                                                        hamstring playing soccer in an outdoor league; he was reluctant to seek medical help
                                                        until now because of embarrassment. He has no signiﬁcant past medical history and
                                                        denies pain in the area. On examination, the patient is somewhat anxious appearing
                                                        but alert and oriented and in no apparent distress. His pulse is 60/min, blood pressure
                                                        is 120/72 mm Hg, and respiratory rate is 12/min. His heart, lung, and abdominal exams
                                                        are all within normal limits. The patient has a ﬁrm nontender mobile mass in his right
                                                        scrotum that does not transilluminate. There is no palpable inguinal adenopathy. No
                                                        abnormalities are found on rectal examination.

                             What is the most likely diagnosis?      A painless, nontransilluminating testicular mass in a man younger than
                                                                      40 is testicular cancer until proven otherwise. Most other common
                                                                      causes of a testicular mass—including testicular torsion, epididymitis,
                                                                      and epididymoorchitis—tend to cause local pain. Hydroceles,
                                                                      varicoceles, and spermatoceles generally allow light penetration on
                                                                      transillumination. Testicular cancer is usually asymptomatic, but
                                                                      incidental injuries (e.g., sprained hamstring) may bring the scrotal
                                                                      mass to the patient’s attention.

                             What is the most appropriate next       See Figure 16-3.
                              step in management?                      Scrotal ultrasound: to conﬁrm that the lesion is a solid mass.

RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
                                                                       Pending the results of the ultrasound:
                                                                         Preoperative workup: including serum tumor markers (especially
                                                                           β-hCG and AFP) and a chest x-ray to look for metastatic disease.
                                                                         Radical inguinal orchiectomy (RIO): both to obtain a histological
                                                                           diagnosis and to provide local tumor control. The procedure
                                                                           removes the involved testis, epididymis, and spermatic cord up the
                                                                           internal inguinal ring. Since the testicular lymphatics do not drain
                                                                           to the scrotum, RIO is performed via an inguinal incision to avoid
                                                                           inoculating the scrotum with cancerous cells.
                             How does the histologic diagnosis       Ninety percent of testicular cancers are derived from germ cells.
                              affect treatment?                       The remainder are from stromal cells. Half are pure seminomatous
                                                                      germ cell tumors (SGCT) and the other half—which includes mixed
                                                                      tumors—are nonseminomatous (NSGCT). SGCT are exquisitely
                                                                      sensitive to radiation therapy, while NSGCT are not radiosensitive.

                                                                                Painless, non-transilluminating testicular mass

                                                                                                   Scrotal ultrasound

                                                                                 Solid                                            Cystic

                                                                                 1) Pre-op workup: CXR                           Consider
                                                                                 and tumor markers                              alternative
                                                                                 2) Radical orchiectomy                         diagnoses

                                                                      FIGURE 16-3.       Algorithm for evaluation of a testicular mass.

                            490
 CASE 21                    A 25-year-old man was the unrestrained driver of a motorcycle involved in a high-speed
                             collision with a tree. The paramedics noted him at the scene to have a pulse of
                             120/min, blood pressure of 96/56 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 14/min, and Glasgow
                             Coma Scale (GCS) of 10. The paramedics placed two large-bore peripheral intravenous
                             lines and administered 2 liters of intravenous ﬂuids during transportation to the nearest
                             level-one trauma center. His vital signs on arrival at the emergency department are
                             temperature 36.5º C (97.7º F), pulse 110/min, blood pressure 90/70 mm Hg, respiratory
                             rate 14/min, and GCS 10. Multiple lacerations and abrasions are present on the face
                             and upper and lower extremities. The heart, lung, and abdominal ﬁndings are all within
                             normal limits. The bony pelvis is somewhat unstable and appears to have a fracture of
                             the right pubic ramus. Marked scrotal swelling is noted. Peripheral pulses are present
                             in all extremities. A digital rectal examination (DRE) reveals a high-riding prostate. As a
                             nurse is about to insert the Foley catheter, she notes blood at the penile meatus.

 What is the most likely cause of          The presence of blood at the urethral meatus combined with the
  the blood at the patient’s penile         ﬁndings of scrotal swelling (and/or bruising) and a high-riding prostate
  meatus?                                   on DRE are highly suggestive of traumatic urethral injury. This
                                            condition is commonly associated with pelvic fractures, occurring in
                                            10–15% of cases. The posterior urethra is ﬁrmly attached to the pelvis
                                            by the puboprostatic ligaments, so displacement of the pelvis during a
                                            fracture often leads to tearing injuries.

                                                                                                                           RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY
 What are the common                        Blunt pelvic trauma.
  mechanisms of this injury?                 Penetrating injury in the area of the urethra.
                                             Straddle injuries.
                                             Iatrogenic injury (traumatic catheterization, dilation, or transurethral
                                              procedures).
 What is the most appropriate next         A suspected diagnosis of traumatic urethral injury should be promptly
  step in management?                       conﬁrmed with a retrograde urethrogram. Extravasation of contrast
                                            demonstrates the location of the tear. The urethrogram must be
                                            performed prior to insertion of a urethral catheter to avoid further
                                            injury to the urethra.
 What are the long-term risks of           Incomplete or improper treatment frequently results in urethral
  this condition?                           stricture, leading to signiﬁcant voiding problems long term. These
                                            patients also typically have associated orthopedic and neurologic
                                            injuries that must be addressed.

                                                                                                                   491
      RE NAL/G E N ITOU RI NARY

492

                                  N OT E S
Selected Topics in
Emergency Medicine

Case 1               494

Case 2               495

Case 3               496

Case 4               498

Case 5               500

Case 6               502

Case 7               503

Case 8               504

Case 9               505

Case 10              506

Case 11              508

Case 12              510

Case 13              512

Case 14              514

Case 15              515

Case 16              516

Case 17              517

Case 18              518

Case 19              519

Case 20              520

Case 21              522

Case 22              524

                           493
                                CASE 1                    A 14-year-old girl is brought to the emergency department by her father after several
                                                           hours of nausea and vomiting. Her father reports that she has not been “acting like
                                                           herself” for several months. She has been staying in her room and skipping school.
                                                           Prior to coming to the hospital he found an empty bottle of acetaminophen on her
                                                           dresser. Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F), a pulse of
                                                           94/min, and a blood pressure of 108/72 mm Hg. She is diaphoretic, pale, and actively
                                                           vomiting. Her mucous membranes are dry and a fundoscopic examination is within
                                                           normal limits. A urine pregnancy test is negative. Relevant laboratory ﬁndings include
                                                           an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 54 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 42
                                                           U/L, and serum creatinine of 1.1 mg/dL.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Acetaminophen overdose. Although acetaminophen is widely
                                                                         available and safe at therapeutic doses, it accounts for more overdoses
                                                                         and overdose deaths annually in the United States than any other
                                                                         medication. Approximately 50% of all overdoses are unintentional,
                                                                         mostly due to acetaminophen being an active ingredient in many over-
                                                                         the-counter cough and cold medications. Ingestion of large amounts
                                                                         of acetaminophen causes the accumulation of an intermediate
                                                                         metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI), which causes
                                                                         glutathione depletion and oxidative liver injury. Acute tubular necrosis
                                                                         may also occur.

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                What are the signs and symptoms         Patients with untreated acetaminophen overdose progress through four
                                 associated with condition?              clinical stages:
                                                                          Stage I (0.5–24 hours): Diaphoresis, anorexia, malaise, nausea,
                                                                            and vomiting. Laboratory studies typically remain normal while
                                                                            acetaminophen levels rise.
                                                                          Stage II (24–72 hours): Stage I symptoms resolve, but hepatic
                                                                            aminotransferases begin to rise. Later, the patient may experience
                                                                            right upper quadrant pain, elevated prothrombin time, and increased
                                                                            total bilirubin. Oliguria and renal failure may become evident.
                                                                          Stage III (72–96 hours): Liver function abnormalities peak. Stage I
                                                                            symptoms reappear with jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, acute
                                                                            renal failure, and a bleeding diathesis. Death is most common in this
                                                                            stage.
                                                                          Stage IV (4 days–2 weeks): Liver function recovery is usually
                                                                            complete by 1 week but could be prolonged in severely ill patients.
                                What is the most appropriate            The effectiveness of activated charcoal, which prevents the
                                 treatment for this condition?           systemic absorption of acetaminophen, is questionable. However,
                                                                         N-acetylcysteine, a glutathione precursor, is indicated for
                                                                         acetaminophen overdose of unknown time and quantity as well as for
                                                                         acetaminophen plasma levels above the “possible hepatic toxicity” line
                                                                         of the Rumack-Matthew nomogram.
                                What is the prognosis for patients      The outcome of acetaminophen overdose is almost universally positive
                                 with this condition?                    if N-acetylcysteine is administered in a timely fashion. However,
                                                                         acetaminophen is the most common cause of acute liver failure in the
                                                                         United States. If there is a delay in the initiation of N-acetylcysteine
                                                                         therapy, morbidity and mortality increases signiﬁcantly, often requiring
                                                                         transplantation.

                               494
 CASE 2                    A 2-year-old boy is brought to the emergency department after eating lunch. His mother
                            reports that he just ﬁnished eating a peanut butter sandwich when he started becoming
                            irritable, scratching at his throat, and crying. He then developed hives over his chest
                            and arms and began having difﬁculty breathing. Physical examination reveals an oral
                            temperature of 37.5° C (99.6° F), a pulse of 170/min, a respiratory rate of 30/min, and
                            a blood pressure of 92/44 mm Hg. He appears ﬂushed all over his body, diaphoretic,
                            and fussy. Examination of the oropharynx suggests laryngeal edema and the respiratory
                            examination reveals diffuse wheezing bilaterally. Urticaria is noted on the chest and
                            upper and lower extremities.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Anaphylactic shock. Anaphylaxis is an immediate and potentially life-
                                          threatening systemic hypersensitivity reaction to a variety of external
                                          stimuli. Anaphylaxis produces a spectrum of symptoms involving the
                                          cutaneous, respiratory, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal systems.
                                          Anaphylaxis results in more than 400 deaths annually in the United
                                          States.

 What is the pathogenesis of this        Anaphylaxis is caused by the activation and release of mediators from
  condition?                              mast cells and basophils in response to a speciﬁc trigger. The release
                                          of these mediators results in many physiologic changes including
                                          increased vascular permeability, vasodilatation, respiratory smooth
                                          muscle contraction, and mucus secretion. Possible triggers include:

                                                                                                                      E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                           Bee and wasp stings.
                                           Blood products.
                                           Food (especially seafood, milk, and nuts).
                                           Medications (particularly β-lactam antibiotics, nonsteroidal
                                            anti-inﬂammatory agents, antineoplastic agents, and angiotensin-
                                            converting enzyme inhibitors).
                                           Radiographic contrast media.

 What are the signs and symptoms         Patients typically develop symptoms of anaphylaxis 5–60 minutes after
  of this condition?                      allergen exposure. The manifestations of anaphylaxis vary widely, with
                                          the most frequent being urticaria and angioedema. Shortness of breath,
                                          wheezing, laryngeal edema, and a variety of gastrointestinal symptoms
                                          have also been reported.
 What is a serious complication of       Anaphylactic shock, present in approximately one-third of anaphylaxis
  this condition?                         cases, occurs when anaphylaxis progresses until perfusion is inadequate
                                          to maintain vital organ function. It is characterized by an increase in
                                          cardiac output with a concomitant decrease in the pulmonary capillary
                                          wedge pressure and peripheral vascular resistance. These changes
                                          manifest clinically as tachycardia, hypotension, and syncope.
 What is the most appropriate            Airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs) should dictate initial
  treatment for this condition?           management: intubation for airway protection, assisted ventilation, and
                                          intravenous access with ﬂuid resuscitation. Antihistamines, particularly
                                          H1-blockers, should be given to all patients with anaphylaxis. However,
                                          if symptoms are severe, intramuscular or intravenous epinephrine can
                                          be added to reverse hypotension and bronchospasm. Corticosteroids
                                          are also routinely administered.

                                                                                                               495
                                CASE 3                    A 19-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by his roommate. He
                                                           has been experiencing abdominal pain of 6 hours’ duration with loss of appetite and
                                                           vomiting. He reports 9/10 pain “all over,” greater on the right side; the pain is dull and
                                                           is not improved or exacerbated by anything in particular. On physical examination, his
                                                           temperature is 38.0° C (100.4° F), blood pressure is 120/70 mm Hg, pulse rate is
                                                           80/min, and respiratory rate is 10/min. His abdominal examination is notable for absent
                                                           bowel sounds and severe tenderness on deep palpation in both the right and left lower
                                                           quadrants. He is also tender on passive internal rotation of the right hip. WBC count is
                                                           14,000/mm3, and urinalysis shows few RBCs and few WBCs. CT scan of the abdomen
                                                           is shown in Figure 17-1.

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                           F I G U R E 17- 1 .   (Reproduced, with permission, from the Pathology Education Instructional
                                                           Resource Digital Library [http://peir.net] at the University of Alabama, Birmingham.)

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?         Acute appendicitis. In the early stages, a patient presents with vague,
                                                                            generalized abdominal pain as visceral nerve ﬁbers are irritated. It
                                                                            often progresses to a sharp, localized pain felt as the overlying parietal
                                                                            peritoneum (right lower quadrant) is irritated. Frank peritoneal signs
                                                                            (rebound tenderness or involuntary guarding) may also be present as
                                                                            somatic nerve ﬁbers are involved. The patient’s presentation, including
                                                                            the emesis, Rovsing’s sign (tenderness in the right lower quadrant
                                                                            during palpation of the left lower quadrant), and the obturator
                                                                            sign (pain in the right lower quadrant on passive internal rotation
                                                                            of the hip) are consistent with this diagnosis. The median age at
                                                                            appendectomy is 22 years old, but a high index of suspicion should be
                                                                            held for all age groups.

                                What is the pathogenesis of this           The most common underlying event in appendicitis appears to be
                                 condition?                                 obstruction of the appendiceal lumen, followed by increased luminal
                                                                            and intramural pressures, ischemia, necrosis, bacterial overgrowth, and
                                                                            sometimes perforation and peritonitis. In younger patients, the initial
                                                                            obstruction is often caused by lymphoid follicular hyperplasia. In older
                                                                            patients, it is thought to be caused by neoplasia, ﬁbrosis, or fecaliths.

                               496
 What conditions should be          Meckel’s diverticulum
  included in the differential       Inﬂammatory bowel disease
  diagnosis?                         Renal calculi
                                     Diverticular disease
                                     Constipation
                                     Gastroenteritis
                                     Urinary tract infection

 What are the typical laboratory   A large majority of adults with appendicitis have WBC count >10,500
  ﬁndings in this condition?        cells/mm3 with neutrophilia > 75%. Pyuria > 10 WBC and > 3 RBCs
                                    per high-powered ﬁeld on urinalysis is frequently seen and is consistent
                                    with bladder wall irritation from appendiceal inﬂammation.
 What are the typical imaging      CT scanning (most accurate) and ultrasonography are the imaging
  ﬁndings in this condition?        modalities of choice in suspected appendicitis. Appendicitis is
                                    suggested by a dilated appendix with a wall thickness > 2 mm, a
                                    fecalith, a phlegmon, an abscess, free ﬂuid, or fat stranding and/or right
                                    lower quadrant inﬂammation (see Figure 17-1).
 What is the most appropriate      Surgical consult is necessary and the patient should be kept NPO
  treatment for this condition?     with IV hydration for correction of electrolyte abnormalities and
                                    perioperative antibiotics. If perforation has occurred, treat with
                                    antibiotics until fever and abnormal WBC count resolve. If an abscess
                                    has formed, percutaneous drainage and broad-spectrum antibiotics are

                                                                                                                 E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                    indicated, with an elective appendectomy performed in 6–8 weeks.

                                                                                                          497
                                CASE 4                    A 4-year-old boy presents to the emergency department being carried by his mother. His
                                                           mother reports that approximately 1 hour ago the child was “playing” with the family
                                                           dog by pulling its tail and ﬂicking its ears while it was eating. Consequently, the dog bit
                                                           the child on the hand deep enough to draw blood. She decided to bring the child into
                                                           the hospital because, despite her best efforts to alleviate his pain, her son continues to
                                                           cry. His vital signs are normal, and on physical exam, he appears healthy yet extremely
                                                           agitated and inconsolable. His right hand is erythematous and swollen about the
                                                           proximal metacarpal phalangeal joints of the second, third, and fourth digits.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Animal bite. Bites from both animals and humans are associated with
                                                                         traumatic events and can have serious complications. Closed-ﬁst injury,
                                                                         chomping to the ﬁnger, and puncture type around the head caused by
                                                                         a tooth can be very dangerous as they can introduce bacteria deep into
                                                                         tendons and fascial planes. See Table 17-1 for a comparison of different
                                                                         types of bites.

                                What is the epidemiology of this        Animal bites occur in an estimated 5 million Americans each year.
                                 condition?                              They occur most frequently by dogs (85%), followed by cats (10%),
                                                                         and other animals such as rodents, ferrets, and rabbits (5%). Men are
                                                                         more likely to be bitten by dogs, while women are more likely to be
                                                                         bitten by cats. Bites are most common in the 5- to 24-year-old range,
                                                                         and approximately 20 people die annually. Human bites occur more

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                         frequently in men, but incidence is unknown, as most do not seek
                                                                         medical attention.
                                What tests and/or imaging studies       Lab studies are not necessary, as most injuries occur in a young, healthy
                                 are could be used to conﬁrm the         population and the diagnosis of infection is clinical. (Culture of
                                 diagnosis?                              infections from animal bites can be collected, but infections resulting
                                                                         from animal and human bites are usually polymicrobial.) If a fracture
                                                                         or introduction of a foreign body (broken tooth) is suspected, a plain
                                                                         ﬁlm is useful.
                                What is the most appropriate            Assess airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs), especially if the bite
                                 treatment for this condition?           involves the head and neck area, followed by copious irrigation with
                                                                         normal saline under high pressure. Administer antibiotic coverage for
                                                                         staphylococci and anaerobes. Consider tetanus prophylaxis and rabies
                                                                         prophylaxis (in raccoons and unfamiliar animals). Consider surgical
                                                                         debridement for complicated wounds and consult an orthopedic
                                                                         surgeon for injuries involving hands, bones, or joints.
                                What are possible complications         Complications include wound infection and cellulitis, septic arthritis,
                                 of this condition?                      deformities, poor healing, sepsis, meningitis, and rabies.

                               498
TA B L E 17- 1 .   Comparison of Human, Dog, and Cat Bites

                                 HUMAN                          DOG                             CAT

   Common causes                 Result of incident involving   Provoked: Antagonizing/hurting animal
                                 alcohol, domestic violence,    Nonprovoked: Approaching animal’s young or while animal is
                                 or child abuse                   eating, approaching animal with rabies, entering animal’s
                                                                  territory

   Gender commonly               Men                            Men                             Women
   affected

   Types of bites/possible       Crush/destruction of tissue,   Crush/destruction of deep       Puncture—infection in 50%
   complications                 infection                      tissue, infection               of cases

   Prognosis                     Generally excellent            Generally good to excellent

                                                                                                                                E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E

                                                                                                                          499
                                CASE 5                     A 17-year-old boy is carried into the emergency department by his friends after he
                                                            caught on ﬁre while attending his high-school pep rally. He was standing by the bonﬁre
                                                            when there was a unanticipated eruption of ﬂames that set both of his pant legs on ﬁre.
                                                            Physical examination reveals a temperature of 37.3° C (98.6° F), a pulse of 120/min,
                                                            a weight of 75 kg (165 lb), and a blood pressure of 100/66 mm Hg. He is in severe
                                                            distress and moaning in discomfort. He recoils in pain when his legs are touched.
                                                            Blisters and black areas, some circumferential, encompass feet, legs, and thighs
                                                            bilaterally.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Second- and third-degree thermal burns.

                                How is this condition classiﬁed?         Burns are categorized by type: chemical, thermal, or radiation.
                                                                          Speciﬁcally, thermal burns are classiﬁed by the depth of tissue
                                                                          destruction and the percentage of total body surface area affected.
                                                                           First-degree burn: Only the epidermis is involved. The area is painful
                                                                            and erythematous, but blisters are notably absent. Capillary reﬁll is
                                                                            intact.
                                                                           Second-degree burn: The epidermis and superﬁcial thickness of the
                                                                            dermis are involved. The area is painful and blisters are present.
                                                                           Third-degree burn: The epidermis, the full thickness of the dermis,
                                                                            and potentially deeper tissue are involved. The area is painless,
                                                                            white, and charred.

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                How is the total body surface area       “The Rule of Nines” is a tool to estimate the percentage of total body
                                 burned (BSA) calculated?                 surface area affected by a burn in an adult, determined 24–48 hours
                                                                          after the injury (see Figure 17-2).
                                                                           Entire head and neck (front and back) = 9%.
                                                                           Entire chest and abdomen = 18%.
                                                                           Entire back =18%.
                                                                           Each arm (front and back) = 9%.
                                                                           Each leg (front and back) = 18%.
                                                                           Each palm or perineum = 1%.

                                What is the appropriate treatment        Rinsing with a copious volume of clean, warm water helps stop the
                                 for this condition?                      burning process. Airway status should be assessed and secured, with
                                                                          special attention to patients with burns secondary to ﬁre. Patients with
                                                                          large burns should receive lactated Ringer’s solution according to
                                                                          the Parkland formula: (4 cm3 of crystalloid) × (% BSA burn) × (body
                                                                          weight in kilograms). Half of the total ﬂuid requirement is given over
                                                                          the initial 8 hours after injury, and half given over the following 16
                                                                          hours, adjusted to maintain at least 1 mL/kg/hr of urine output. Opioid
                                                                          analgesics may be required for pain control. Bandaging with topical
                                                                          silver sulfadiazine and mafenide may be used prophylactically to
                                                                          prevent superinfection.
                                What other symptoms are                  Patients may become hypovolemic and hypothermic, making ﬂuid
                                 common in patients with this             resuscitation and warming an integral component of treatment. With
                                 condition?                               circumferential third-degree burns, the eschar may act as a tourniquet
                                                                          and impair perfusion as edema increases; an escharotomy may be
                                                                          necessary to relieve pressure within the extremity.
                                What complications may develop           Shock, acute renal failure, and superinfection are common
                                 over time?                               complications of severe burn injuries. Superinfection of the burn
                                                                          wounds is most frequently due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

                               500
F I G U R E 17- 2 .   Rule of Nines to estimate percentage of burn. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Tintinalli JE, Kelen GD, Stapczynski JS. Tintin-

                                                                                    E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
alli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 6th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 199-1).

                                                                              501
                                CASE 6                     A 57-year-old man comes to the emergency department because of palpitations.
                                                            He reports that he was in his usual state of health until his daughter came for a visit
                                                            yesterday. About 6 hours after she arrived, he states that he began to feel a bit shaky. His
                                                            symptoms worsened overnight, and this morning he was so tremulous that he could
                                                            barely sign his own name. He also began experiencing severe anxiety and the sensation
                                                            that “my heart was jumping around in my chest.” He subsequently took a cab to the
                                                            emergency department for evaluation. He adds, “My daughter probably thinks I’m with
                                                            the boys at the bar, but I don’t drink a drop when she’s visiting.” Physical examination
                                                            reveals an oral temperature of 37.5° C (99.6° F), an irregular pulse of 151/min, and a
                                                            blood pressure of 132/78 mm Hg. He appears agitated and tremulous, with skin that is
                                                            noticeably clammy. An electrocardiogram is consistent with atrial ﬁbrillation. A blood
                                                            alcohol test is negative.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Atrial ﬁbrillation secondary to alcohol withdrawal syndrome. The
                                                                           signs and symptoms of withdrawal typically begin within 12 hours of
                                                                           sobriety, although withdrawal can also occur as the result of a relative
                                                                           decrease in alcohol intake. Signs and symptoms vary depending on
                                                                           the time elapsed since the patient’s last drink but usually reach peak
                                                                           intensity after approximately 48 hours. Individual variation in the
                                                                           presentation of alcohol withdrawal syndrome reﬂects differences in
                                                                           alcohol intake, susceptibility to withdrawal symptoms, and comorbid
                                                                           medical conditions. It is more common in men than in women.

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                What are the signs and symptoms            Mild withdrawal (presenting within 24 hours): mild autonomic
                                 of this condition?                          hyperactivity including diaphoresis, anxiety, agitation, sinus
                                                                             tachycardia, atrial ﬁbrillation, and GI upset.
                                                                            Moderate withdrawal (presenting between 24 and 36 hours): intense
                                                                             anxiety, insomnia, and excessive adrenergic symptoms.
                                                                            Severe alcohol withdrawal (presenting after 48 hours): disorientation,
                                                                             fever, seizures, and delirium tremens, characterized by confusion
                                                                             and visual hallucinations.
                                What conditions should be                 The differential diagnosis of alcohol withdrawal syndrome must
                                 included in the differential              include conditions frequently associated with alcohol abuse. The
                                 diagnosis?                                seizures seen in severe alcohol withdrawal may also be secondary
                                                                           to head trauma sustained from alcohol-related injuries. The
                                                                           hallucinations associated with delirium tremens may be due to a
                                                                           psychiatric disorder or concomitant drug use.
                                What tests and imaging tools              A toxicology screen is helpful in determining the patient’s blood alcohol
                                 could be used to conﬁrm the               concentration and what other drugs may be contributing to the patient’s
                                 diagnosis?                                symptoms. An electrocardiogram is indicated in patients with an
                                                                           abnormal cardiac examination. Head CT is indicated for patients with
                                                                           focal seizures or a history of head trauma with focal neurologic ﬁndings.
                                What is the most appropriate              Patients are frequently volume depleted and hypoglycemic, requiring
                                 treatment for this condition?             infusion with dextrose 50% in water. Concurrently, parenteral thiamine
                                                                           and magnesium sulfate should be administered. Thiamine deﬁciency
                                                                           is frequently seen in alcoholic populations and hypomagnesemia
                                                                           has been closely associated with tremors and seizures. The use of
                                                                           benzodiazepines, speciﬁcally lorazepam, is a validated treatment
                                                                           for alcohol withdrawal. Patients with moderate to severe withdrawal
                                                                           should be admitted for treatment and observation, particularly if
                                                                           their withdrawal is complicated by other medical conditions. Patients
                                                                           with mild withdrawal that responds to treatment may be referred for
                                                                           outpatient treatment of alcohol abuse.

                               502
 CASE 7                    A 43-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by his wife after she found
                            him in their winter cabin confused and dizzy. He drove up to the mountains the
                            day before to prepare the cabin for their winter vacation. When she arrived, he was
                            staggering around the cabin and complaining about a bad headache. His wife adds
                            that he must have worked very hard to prepare the house because the cabin ﬂoors were
                            swept and the old kerosene heater was working well. Physical examination reveals a
                            temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F), a pulse rate of 86/min, blood pressure of 126/82
                            mm Hg, and pulse oximetry of 99% on room air. He is not oriented to place or time and
                            has a ruddy complexion. Signiﬁcant laboratory ﬁndings include an arterial blood gas
                            with a pH of 7.30, a PaCO2 of 35 mm Hg, and a PaO2 of 85 mm Hg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Carbon monoxide poisoning. Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless
                                          gas produced by hydrocarbon combustion. It binds to hemoglobin
                                          with greater afﬁnity than oxygen and forms carboxyhemoglobin, which
                                          causes impaired oxygen transport and utilization. Carbon monoxide
                                          poisoning is a hypoxemic syndrome that is caused by overexposure
                                          to the gas through automobile exhaust, smoke inhalation, poorly
                                          functioning heating systems, and improperly vented fuel-burning
                                          devices.

 What is the epidemiology of this        Carbon monoxide poisoning is responsible for up to 40,000 emergency
  condition?                              department visits and over 5000 deaths annually. Accidental carbon

                                                                                                                    E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                          monoxide poisoning is estimated to be responsible for approximately
                                          10% of these deaths. Accidental poisoning demonstrates seasonal and
                                          regional variation and is most common in cold climates during the
                                          winter months.
 What other symptoms are                 Symptoms are highly variable. Mild carbon monoxide poisoning often
  common in patients with this            presents with constitutional symptoms such as headache, malaise,
  condition?                              nausea, and dizziness. Classically, the skin and lips may appear cherry
                                          red. Chronic low-level exposure to carbon monoxide may cause ﬂulike
                                          symptoms with generalized myalgias. Severe carbon monoxide poisoning
                                          can cause seizures, syncope, coma, myocardial ischemia, ventricular
                                          arrhythmias, pulmonary edema, and profound lactic acidosis.
 What are the typical laboratory         Carboxyhemoglobin analysis must be obtained from a venous
  ﬁndings in this condition?              or arterial blood gas, not pulse oximetry. The light sensors of the
                                          pulse oximeter erroneously interpret carboxyhemoglobin as regular
                                          hemoglobin, resulting in spuriously elevated oxygen saturation levels.
                                          Elevated blood levels of carboxyhemoglobin suggest carbon monoxide
                                          poisoning, but low levels do not rule out exposure. If signiﬁcant time
                                          has elapsed since exposure or the patient receives 100% oxygen,
                                          carboxyhemoglobin levels may be falsely low. Chronic smokers may
                                          have persistently elevated carbon monoxide levels as high as 10%.
                                          Additionally, creatinine kinase–MB fraction or troponin may be
                                          elevated due to myocardial ischemia.
 What is the most appropriate            Patients should be removed from the carbon monoxide source and
  treatment for this condition?           promptly started on 100% oxygen by nonrebreather face mask.
                                          Comatose patients or those with severely impaired mental status should
                                          be intubated and mechanically ventilated. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
                                          is indicated for pregnant patients, patients with severely elevated
                                          carboxyhemoglobin, myocardial ischemia, or neurologic symptoms,
                                          including syncope, seizures, or coma. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
                                          facilitates the displacement of carbon monoxide from hemoglobin.

                                                                                                             503
                                CASE 8                        A 55-year-old man was walking through the hospital when he fell to the ground
                                                               suddenly. It is conﬁrmed at the scene that he is unresponsive, not breathing, and does
                                                               not have a palpable heartbeat or pulse.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?          Cardiac arrest (also known as sudden cardiac death). Cardiac arrest
                                                                             is deﬁned as cessation of cardiac function, whether death occurs
                                                                             or not, and results in over 325,000 deaths per year. Placement of
                                                                             automated external deﬁbrillators (AEDs) in the community and
                                                                             training of individuals has been a useful public health measure. The
                                                                             mechanisms of cardiac arrest include ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF),
                                                                             pulseless ventricular tachycardia (pVT), pulseless electrical activity
                                                                             (PEA/electromechanical dissociation), and asystole (loss of all electrical
                                                                             activity).

                                What risk factors are associated            Men, coronary artery disease (CAD), family history of premature CAD,
                                 with an increased incidence of              smoking, dyslipidemia, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, sedentary
                                 this condition?                             lifestyle, structural heart abnormalities (hypertrophic or dilated
                                                                             cardiomyopathy, valvular disease) atherosclerosis, heart failure, long
                                                                             QT syndrome, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
                                What is the most appropriate                A (airway), B (breathing) C (circulation) D (deﬁbrillation) survey, then
                                 treatment for this patient?                 advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) protocol:

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                              Secure airway with more invasive equipment, deliver 100% oxygen,
                                                                               obtain IV access, consider pacing, search for reversible causes.
                                                                              Follow speciﬁc ACLS protocol for pVT or VF, PEA, or asystole.
                                                                              Continue cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) throughout, pausing
                                                                               only if necessary to intubate patient and to deliver shocks.
                                                                              Stabilization with medications appropriate to etiology and treatment
                                                                               for myocardial ischemia, heart failure, and electrolyte disturbances.
                                                                             Cardiology consultation and coronary angiography to assess status of
                                                                             CAD.
                                What tests and/or imaging tools             Cardiac enzymes, electrolytes (including calcium and magnesium),
                                 may be used to conﬁrm the                   toxicology screen, thyroid-stimulating hormone, anti-arrhythmic drug
                                 diagnosis?                                  levels (if applicable), electrocardiogram, chest x-ray.
                                What is a major adverse outcome             Anoxic encephalopathy occurs in 30–80% of cases.
                                 of this condition?
                                What is the prognosis for patients          Upon emergency department presentation, the most important
                                 with this condition?                        determinants of survival include the following:
                                                                              Unsupported systolic blood pressure (SBP) > 90 mm Hg.
                                                                              Time from loss of consciousness to return of spontaneous circulation
                                                                               (ROSC) of < 25 minutes.
                                                                              Some degree of neurologic responsiveness.

                                                                             All cardiac arrest is associated with poor outcomes, especially out-of-
                                                                             hospital arrest; however, these outcome statistics (survival until hospital
                                                                             discharge) differ by etiology:
                                                                              Asystole: 0–2%
                                                                              pVT: 60–70%
                                                                              PEA: 11%
                                                                              VF: 25–40%

                               504
 CASE 9                    A 28-year-old woman is brought to the emergency department by her husband after she
                            developed a high fever. She delivered a baby boy by cesarean section 5 days ago and
                            then was discharged 3 days after delivery. Several hours ago, she began feeling ﬂushed
                            and her thermometer showed a fever of 38.2° C (100.8° F). Physical examination
                            reveals an oral temperature of 38.7° C (101.7° F), a pulse of 105/min, and a blood
                            pressure of 124/82 mm Hg. Abdominal examination is signiﬁcant for a nontender
                            abdomen with a normally healing cesarean section scar. Examination of the lower
                            extremities reveals mild left lower-extremity edema with some pain on palpation
                            without palpable cords.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Deep venous thrombosis (DVT). A DVT is a common cause of
                                          postoperative fever 4–6 days after surgery. Risk factors for DVT
                                          include recent surgery, a history of immobilization, and pregnancy or
                                          postpartum status. Male to female ratio is 1:2.1.

 What is the pathophysiology of          Virchow’s triad (venous stasis, vessel wall injury, hypercoagulable state)
  this condition?                         is the primary mechanism for the development of venous thrombosis.
 What are the possible causes of         The many causes of postoperative fever are best remembered as the
  postop fever?                           “5 W’s:”
                                          Wind (postoperative days 1–2): This is often the result of atelectasis.
                                          Reasons include ventilator support and shallow inspiration due to

                                                                                                                       E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                          incisional pain.
                                          Water (postoperative days 3–5): Urinary tract infection (UTI). This is
                                          frequently secondary to urinary catheters used during and after surgery.
                                          Walking (postoperative days 4–6): Deep venous thrombosis can occur,
                                          most frequently in patients recovering from pelvic, orthopedic, or
                                          general surgery.
                                          Wounds (postoperative days 5–7): Wound infections or abscess
                                          formation must be considered.
                                          Wonder drugs (postoperative day 7+): Medications prescribed
                                          postoperatively may result in a febrile reaction.
                                          Of note, fevers prior to postoperative day 3 are unlikely to be infectious
                                          unless caused by Clostridium difﬁcile or β-hemolytic streptococci.
 How can adverse events best be          Early ambulation, prophylactic anticoagulation, and compression
  prevented postoperatively?              stockings can minimize the risk of DVT. Atelectasis is best prevented
                                          with incentive spirometry. The risk of UTIs can be minimized with
                                          short-term use of urinary catheters. Pre- and postoperative antibiotics
                                          can prevent wound infections.
 What tests and/or imaging tools         DVT is most commonly diagnosed by duplex venous ultrasound.
  could be used to conﬁrm the             Atelectasis can be diagnosed by chest x-ray; UTI can be evaluated with
  diagnosis?                              urinalysis and urine culture. Potentially infected wounds should be
                                          carefully examined and cultured.
 What is the most appropriate            Anticoagulation is the mainstay of therapy for DVT. After initial
  treatment for this condition?           anticoagulation with heparin, long-term anticoagulation is usually
                                          maintained with warfarin. Mobilization of the limb is also encouraged.

                                                                                                                505
                                CASE 10                     A 14-year-old boy arrives at the emergency department via ambulance accompanied by
                                                             a neighbor who found him ﬂoating facedown in a nearby lake. The neighbor reports
                                                             that he was jogging around the lake when he noticed an oddly shaped object ﬂoating
                                                             out near the center of the water. He automatically jumped to save him. The neighbor
                                                             reports that he seemed to “wake up” but has been acting funny since he was brought
                                                             ashore. His vital signs include a temperature of 34.5° C (94.2° F), with a heart rate of
                                                             150/min, respiratory rate of 6/min, and pulse oximetry of 90%. On physical exam he
                                                             appears cyanotic around the lips, withdraws to painful stimuli, uses inappropriate words
                                                             and phrases, and opens his eyes to pain.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Drowning. Drowning results in primary respiratory impairment
                                                                           following submersion in a liquid medium, commonly water. A scenario
                                                                           depicting a motionless individual ﬂoating in water is more typical than
                                                                           the classic image of someone thrashing about. Deaths in the United
                                                                           States surpass 800 per year, with a bimodal distribution, with children
                                                                           < 4 years drowning in bathtubs and swimming pools, and adolescent/
                                                                           young adults 15–24 years old drowning in natural bodies of water. The
                                                                           male:female ratio is 12:1 for boat-related incidents and 4:1 for
                                                                           non-boat-related incidents.

                                What is the pathophysiology of            After initial gasping and possible aspiration, immersion stimulates
                                 this condition?                           hyperventilation, voluntary apnea, and laryngospasm. Asphyxia

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                           leads to relaxation of the airway, and water may enter the lungs
                                                                           (“wet drowning”), or laryngospasm may continue until cardiac arrest
                                                                           (“dry drowning”). Water entering the lungs signiﬁcantly impairs gas
                                                                           exchange, leading to hypoxia and metabolic acidosis with injury to
                                                                           body systems, particularly the heart and central nervous system (CNS).
                                How is this condition classiﬁed?           Asymptomatic.
                                                                            Symptomatic: altered vital signs, anxious, breathing abnormalities,
                                                                             metabolic acidosis, altered level of consciousness.
                                                                            Cardiac arrest: apnea, cardiac arrhythmias (asystole, ventricular
                                                                             tachycardia/ﬁbrillation, bradycardia).
                                                                            Obviously dead: apnea, rigor mortis, dependent lividity, no CNS
                                                                             activity, normothermic with asystole.
                                What is the Glascow Coma Scale            Patients score on this scale depending on their motor response, verbal
                                 score for this patient?                   response, and eye opening. For this patient: withdrawal to pain = 4,
                                                                           uses inappropriate words and phrases = 3, eyes open to pain = 2. 4 + 3
                                                                           + 2 = 9.
                                What other conditions are                 Underlying conditions that may have contributed to the incident
                                 associated with this condition?           include: anxiety/panic disorder, major depression/suicide, poor
                                                                           neuromuscular control, diabetes, hypoglycemia, myocardial infarction,
                                                                           and seizure disorder.

                               506
 What tests and/or imaging tools      Continuous pulse oximetry and electrocardiogram are necessary. Lab
  could be used to conﬁrm the          tests include an arterial blood gas (ABG), rapid glucose, complete
  diagnosis?                           blood count, electrolytes, lactate level, blood alcohol level, and
                                       toxicological studies. Chest x-ray should be ordered as well as head CT
                                       if suggested by history.
 What are possible complications      Complications include neurologic injury, pulmonary edema, acute
  of this condition?                   respiratory distress syndrome, secondary pulmonary infection, multiple
                                       organ system failure, acute tubular necrosis, myoglobinuria, and/or
                                       hemoglobinuria.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Those who are alert or mildly obtunded at presentation have excellent
  with this condition?                 chance for full recovery. If patients have received cardiopulmonary
                                       resuscitation and have ﬁxed and dilated pupils or no spontaneous
                                       respiration, their prognosis is poor.

                                                                                                                 E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E

                                                                                                          507
                                CASE 11                   A 40-year-old man with no signiﬁcant past medical history is brought to the emergency
                                                           department by his wife, who reports that he has been drooling, vomiting, wheezing, and
                                                           sweating uncontrollably for the past hour. He is an otherwise healthy man who takes
                                                           no medication, denies allergies, and works as a tomato farmer. He appears somewhat
                                                           lethargic and is having trouble speaking due to his shortness of breath. His wife
                                                           reports that he was testing a new pesticide that morning. On physical examination, his
                                                           temperature is 37.0° C (98.6° F), blood pressure is 100/70 mm Hg, pulse rate is 40/min,
                                                           and respiratory rate is 6/min. His cardiac examination is notable for a regular but slow
                                                           rhythm, and his skin is moist with sweat.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Acute organophosphate poisoning. Organophosphates are potent
                                                                         cholinesterase inhibitors that can cause severe toxicity after ingestion,
                                                                         inhalation, or cutaneous exposure. They have been used in both
                                                                         military and terrorist applications as well as medically to reverse
                                                                         neuromuscular blockade and treat glaucoma, myasthenia gravis, and
                                                                         Alzheimer’s disease. Most toxicity results from exposure to pesticides
                                                                         (102,754 injuries in 2007).

                                What symptoms are common in             Signs and symptoms of cholinergic toxicity can be remembered by the
                                 patients with this condition?           mnemonic DUMBBBELS:
                                                                         Defecation/diarrhea
                                                                         Urination

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                         Miosis
                                                                         Bronchospasm/Bronchorrhea/Bradycardia
                                                                         Emesis
                                                                         Lacrimation
                                                                         Salivation
                                                                         Additionally, muscle weakness, fasciculations, lethargy, respiratory
                                                                         depression, excitability, seizures, and coma may develop.
                                How is this condition classiﬁed?        Three clinical stages (not all stages occur in each poisoning):
                                                                          Acute toxicity: clinical syndrome described above.
                                                                          Intermediate syndrome (24–96 hours after exposure): neck
                                                                           ﬂexion and weakness, decreased deep tendon reﬂexes, cranial
                                                                           nerve abnormalities, proximal muscle weakness, and respiratory
                                                                           insufﬁciency.
                                                                          Delayed neurotoxicity: transient, painful, stocking-glove paresthesias
                                                                           with symmetric ﬂaccid motor polyneuropathy; associated with
                                                                           speciﬁc organophosphate agents.
                                Administration of which                 If the diagnosis is in doubt, an atropine challenge may be used;
                                 medication can conﬁrm this              anticholinergic signs and symptoms should not appear in patients with
                                 diagnosis?                              organophosphate poisoning.

                               508
 What are the typical laboratory   The best index of the degree of poisoning, as well as the response to
  ﬁndings in this condition?        treatment, is the RBC acetylcholinesterase activity. If unavailable,
                                    measure plasma cholinesterase activity (which does not correlate as
                                    well with clinical severity).
 What management is most           Prevent contamination of hospital staff or other patients, remove
  appropriate for this condition?   affected clothing, wash skin with soap and water, endotracheal
                                    intubation, continuous electrocardiography, volume resuscitation,
                                    atropine titrated to the resolution of bronchoconstriction and
                                    respiratory secretions, pralidoxime given for nicotinic blockade,
                                    diazepam for seizure prophylaxis.

                                                                                                              E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E

                                                                                                        509
                                CASE 12                    A 63-year-old man presents to the clinic complaining of 4 days of “seeing spider webs”
                                                            in his right eye. He senses clear-colored spidery patterns in his lower ﬁeld of vision,
                                                            only in his right eye. The sensation began upon awakening in the morning and has
                                                            increased slightly over the past 4 days. He now feels that he has difﬁculty seeing the
                                                            lower periphery with his right eye. In addition, he says his vision gets “darker” in that
                                                            area after he is in a bright room. He denies headache, eye pain, eye discharge, or any
                                                            other neurological symptoms. He denies recent eye trauma, although he did have a
                                                            cataract removed 1 year ago. He is otherwise healthy, with no signiﬁcant past medical
                                                            history other than baseline myopia. On physical examination, his vital signs are within
                                                            normal limits and he appears generally well. His head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat
                                                            (HEENT) examination is remarkable for the use of corrective lenses and a slight
                                                            lower hemispheric visual ﬁeld defect in his right eye on visual ﬁeld confrontation
                                                            examination; otherwise, his exam is normal.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Retinal detachment. Most “ﬂoaters,” which this patient describes as
                                                                           a “clear spider web,” are idiopathic vitreous ﬂoaters. However, a new
                                                                           ﬂoater followed by progressive loss of peripheral vision likely represents
                                                                           posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) followed by retinal detachment.

                                How is this condition classiﬁed?          Retinal detachments are classiﬁed as rhegmatogenous (break in
                                                                           retina) or nonrhegmatogenous (leakage or exudation beneath retina
                                                                           or vitreous traction on retina). Rhegmatogenous detachments are the

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                           most common.
                                What is the pathophysiology of            Rhegmatogenous detachments are usually a direct consequence
                                 this condition?                           of PVD. PVD results from liqueﬁed vitreous breaking through
                                                                           the posterior vitreous face that causes the vitreous to detach. This
                                                                           process can put tension on vitreoretinal adhesions, which then
                                                                           leads to an actual retinal tear. Fluid can leak into the tear and force
                                                                           the neurosensory retina to separate from the underlying pigment
                                                                           epithelium and choroid. Nonrhegmatogenous retinal detachments
                                                                           tend to occur in patients with inﬂammatory conditions or retinal
                                                                           neovascularization from diabetes. Inﬂammatory conditions can lead to
                                                                           exudative ﬂuid accumulation beneath the retina, causing detachment
                                                                           without tear. Neovascularization can cause strong vitreoretinal
                                                                           adhesions that lead to direct detachment. Direct trauma can cause
                                                                           both types, depending on whether the retina is torn or if a contracting
                                                                           ﬁber-optic transvitreal retinal band is formed after the trauma, leading
                                                                           to tractional detachment.
                                What risk factors are associated          The most common risk factor is myopia, which increases risk 4- to 10-
                                 with an increased incidence of            fold. Up to half of nontraumatic, nonsurgical retinal detachments may
                                 this condition?                           be attributed to myopia. Other risk factors include aphakia (cataract
                                                                           removal without lens placement), removal of a cataract complicated
                                                                           by loss of vitreous ﬂuid, and lattice degeneration (focal thinning of the
                                                                           retinal periphery present in 6–8% of the general population).

                               510
 What is the most appropriate    All patients with symptoms of PVD (e.g., ﬂoaters, photopsias, other
  treatment for this condition?   visual disturbances) or retinal detachment (progressive loss of
                                  peripheral and eventually, central vision) should be urgently referred
                                  to an ophthalmologist for a dilated eye examination. Close observation
                                  by an ophthalmologist is appropriate only in patients with PVD who do
                                  not have a retinal tear. Laser photocoagulation and cryoretinopexy are
                                  ﬁrst-line interventions in patients with symptomatic PVD with retinal
                                  tears. Patients who progress to retinal detachment can be treated with
                                  pneumatic retinopexy, scleral buckle, or vitrectomy. All patients should
                                  be counseled regarding their increased risk of involvement of the
                                  contralateral eye, and should be followed accordingly.

                                                                                                             E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E

                                                                                                     511
                                CASE 13                   A 28-year-old previously healthy female is brought to the emergency department by
                                                           her boyfriend because of palpitations. Her boyfriend states that they had just left a bar
                                                           when she began having a “ﬂuttering” sensation in her chest. She quickly became short
                                                           of breath and light-headed. Physical examination reveals an oral temperature of 37.0° C
                                                           (98.6° F), a pulse rate of 193/min, a respiratory rate of 20/min, and a blood pressure of
                                                           96/46 mm Hg. Examination of the lungs is unremarkable, and a cardiac examination is
                                                           signiﬁcant only for tachycardia. Her electrocardiogram is shown in Figure 17-3.

                                                           F I G U R E 17- 3 .   (Reproduced, with permission, from Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS,
                                                           Hauser SL, Longo DL,Jameson JL, Isselbacher J, et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medi-
                                                           cine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 20054: Fig. 214-7).

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                What is the most likely diagnosis?         Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) refers to a number of
                                                                            tachyarrhythmias, the majority of which occur as a result of a reentrant
                                                                            mechanism. Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) is
                                                                            the most common of these tachyarrhythmias, accounting for 50–60%
                                                                            of cases. Patients with this condition have a heart rate between 120
                                                                            and 250/min and suffer from the sudden onset and termination
                                                                            of palpitations, hypotension, and syncope. Some patients may be
                                                                            asymptomatic. Precipitating factors include alcohol, caffeine, and
                                                                            sympathomimetic amines.

                                What is the epidemiology of this           AVNRT commonly presents in the third or fourth decade of life in
                                 condition?                                 patients without underlying heart disease. Seventy percent of patients
                                                                            are women.
                                What is the pathogenesis of this           In patients with AVNRT, the AV node is divided into two pathways
                                 condition?                                 with varying conduction speeds and refractory periods. The tachycardia
                                                                            is initiated when an appropriately timed atrial complex is blocked in
                                                                            one pathway and conducted down the other to the ventricles. As the
                                                                            impulse is conducted, the previously blocked pathway recovers so that
                                                                            the impulse can now be conducted up toward the atria. This sets up the
                                                                            reentrant circuit.
                                What tests and/or imaging tools            An electrocardiogram is invaluable in diagnosing PSVT or, in this
                                 could be used to conﬁrm the                case, AVNRT. Because the causative reentrant mechanism commonly
                                 diagnosis?                                 occurs within the AV node itself, the atria and ventricles are stimulated
                                                                            simultaneously. The P waves are therefore difﬁcult to visualize (see
                                                                            arrow in Figure 17-3) because they occur concurrently with the narrow
                                                                            QRS complexes.

                               512
 What is the most appropriate    If the patient is hemodynamically stable, therapeutic intervention
  treatment for this condition?   should begin with vagotonic maneuvers, such as the Valsalva maneuver
                                  or carotid sinus massage. These techniques enhance parasympathetic
                                  tone and can hasten arrhythmia termination. If these maneuvers
                                  are unsuccessful, intravenous adenosine is the treatment of choice.
                                  β-Blockers are considered to be second-line agents. Cardioversion is
                                  indicated only with severe hemodynamic compromise. Patients who
                                  require chronic therapy may beneﬁt from radiofrequency catheter
                                  modiﬁcation of the AV node.

                                                                                                         E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E

                                                                                                  513
                                CASE 14                   A 69-year-old woman with a history of acute myeloblastic leukemia who is currently
                                                           receiving high-dose chemotherapy is brought to the emergency department because
                                                           she is breathing rapidly and lapsing in and out of consciousness. Her nurse reports that
                                                           she has been doing well with her chemotherapeutic regimen and has been maintaining
                                                           her weight with minimally decreased appetite and little nausea or vomiting. She has no
                                                           other signiﬁcant medical, surgical, or developmental history other than the placement
                                                           of a tunneled central venous infusion port 1 week ago into her left subclavian vein.
                                                           On physical examination, she is diaphoretic and appears disoriented to person, place,
                                                           and time. Her temperature is 40° C (104° F), blood pressure is 70/50 mm Hg, pulse
                                                           rate is 140/min, and respiratory rate is 30/min. Examination of her head and neck
                                                           is unremarkable, with no erythema, masses, or discharge noted, and there is no
                                                           photophobia or neck stiffness. Otherwise, the exam is normal.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?      Severe sepsis, possibly septic shock. Although the clinical picture in
                                                                         this patient (delirium, tachypnea, fever, hypotension, tachycardia) is
                                                                         relatively nonspeciﬁc, her immunosuppression and the presence of a
                                                                         foreign body (infusion port) make infection more likely.

                                How is this condition classiﬁed?        The term sepsis is a clinical syndrome that lies on a spectrum of disease
                                                                         severity, as follows:
                                                                          Infection: invasion of normally sterile host tissue by microorganisms.
                                                                          Bacteremia: presence of bacteria in the blood.

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                          Systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS): two or more of the
                                                                           following: temperature > 38° C (100.4° F) or < 36° C (96.8° F); heart
                                                                           rate > 90/min; respiratory rate > 20/min or PaCO2 < 32 mm Hg; WBC
                                                                           > 12,000/mm3, < 4000/mm3, or > 10% band forms.
                                                                          Sepsis: presence of SIRS and deﬁnitive evidence of infection.
                                                                          Severe sepsis: sepsis with organ dysfunction, hypotension, or
                                                                           hypoperfusion.
                                                                          Septic shock: sepsis and hypotension despite adequate ﬂuid
                                                                           resuscitation, along with oliguria, change in mental status, or lactic
                                                                           acidosis (evidence of perfusion abnormalities).
                                What laboratory tests could be          Staining the buffy coat (white cells) with Gram stain or acridine orange
                                 used to conﬁrm the diagnosis?           is the best rapid test available to demonstrate bacteria that are causing
                                                                         sepsis. Blood culture, urinalysis, and urine culture are also helpful.
                                What is the most appropriate            Following stabilization of the airway, ﬂuid resuscitation is crucial to
                                 treatment for this condition?           normalizing blood pressure; vasopressors are often utilized to augment
                                                                         the weakened endogenous vascular tone. Invasive blood pressure
                                                                         monitoring (arterial line), central venous pressure monitoring (central
                                                                         venous catheter), continuous arterial pulse oximetry, and frequently
                                                                         arterial blood gas measurement and lactate levels are obtained. Identify
                                                                         the source of infection by culturing skin inoculation sites, catheters,
                                                                         urine, blood, sputum (if any), and stool. Internal ﬂuid collections must
                                                                         be drained and cultured immediately. Patients with sepsis must be
                                                                         started on empiric, broad-spectrum antibiotics and switched to more
                                                                         speciﬁc coverage once the bug is identiﬁed. Stress-dose corticosteroids
                                                                         may be considered if the patient’s condition is refractory to persistent
                                                                         ﬂuid challenges and/or pressor support.

                               514
 CASE 15                      A 56-year-old woman presents to the emergency department following a syncopal
                               episode. She was working in her garden and had just stood up from a ﬂowerbed when
                               she began feeling light-headed. She remembers her vision going gray before she lost
                               consciousness and fell to the ground. She does not know how long she was out but
                               was oriented when she awoke. She denies loss of bowel or bladder continence. On
                               physical examination, she is alert, oriented, and interactive. Her vital signs include a
                               temperature of 37.1° C (98.8° F), heart rate of 95/min, blood pressure of 113/68 mm
                               Hg, and respiratory rate of 12/min. Her heart has a normal rate and regular rhythm
                               without murmurs, rubs, or gallops. There are no abnormalities on neurological
                               examination.

 What are the potentially life-              There are several life-threatening conditions that must be ruled out
  threatening causes of this                  in patients with syncope. These include cardiac syncope, blood
  condition?                                  loss, pulmonary embolism, and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Cardiac
                                              causes include arrhythmia, ischemia, and structural abnormalities
                                              (e.g., valvular disease, cardiac tamponade, atrial myxoma, or
                                              cardiomyopathy). Seizure, stroke, and head injury can also manifest
                                              as a syncopal episode. Patients with cardiac syncope have signiﬁcantly
                                              increased risk for sudden death at short-term and 1-year follow-ups.

 What are the benign causes of this           Neurocardiogenic
  condition?                                   Micturition

                                                                                                                          E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                               Situational
                                               Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
                                               Orthostatic syncope
                                               Volume loss
                                               Autonomic dysfunction
                                               Medication-related syncope

 What are important components                History:
  of the history and physical exam?              Age: young patients are more likely to have neurocardiogenic
                                                  syncope.
                                                 Associated symptoms: chest pain, palpitations, dyspnea, headache,
                                                  etc.
                                                 Position: prolonged standing is likely neurocardiogenic; moving
                                                  from lying to standing suggests orthostasis; syncope while lying is
                                                  concerning for arrhythmia.
                                                 Onset: sudden onset suggests arrhythmia.
                                                 Exertional syncope: necessitates a cardiac workup.
                                               Physical exam:
                                                 Vital signs.
                                                 Cardiac exam: might suggest structural causes or heart failure.
                                                 Lung exam: can suggest heart failure or other pathology.
                                                 Neurological exam: might suggest stroke.
                                                 Neck exam: check for carotid bruits, aortic stenosis, elevated
                                                  jugular venous pressure.
 What should the workup of this              While the patient’s history and exam ﬁndings are most suggestive
  patient include?                            of orthostatic syncope, the clinician must rule out possible life-
                                              threatening etiologies. She should be placed on cardiac monitoring
                                              and an electrocardiogram should be obtained to evaluate for heart
                                              block, bradycardia, pre-excitation, prolonged QT intervals, or Q waves.
                                              In patients with altered mental status, glucose and electrolyte levels
                                              should be checked. A complete blood count may be useful if blood
                                              loss is suspected. Abnormal ﬁndings on neurologic exam necessitate
                                              brain imaging.
                                                                                                                    515
                                CASE 16                     A 14-year-old boy presents to the emergency department with groin pain. He was
                                                             playing basketball until he felt a sudden shooting pain originating from the left side
                                                             of his scrotum and radiating upward into his belly. The pain has been severe and
                                                             unremitting and has caused him to vomit more than once. Physical examination reveals
                                                             a nervous adolescent in moderate distress with a temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F), a
                                                             pulse of 120/min, and a blood pressure of 105/60 mm Hg. The left side of his scrotum
                                                             is erythematous, edematous, and exquisitely tender to palpation, with loss of cremaster
                                                             reﬂex on the ipsilateral side. There is no relief of pain upon elevation of his left testicle
                                                             that is lying horizontally.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?         Testicular torsion. The testicle spins on the spermatic cord, which may
                                                                            result in venous occlusion, engorgement, and arterial ischemia, leading
                                                                            to infarction of the testicle.

                                What conditions should be                   Acute appendicitis
                                 included in the differential                Epididymitis
                                 diagnosis?                                  Fournier gangrene
                                                                             Hernia
                                                                             Hydrocele
                                                                             Orchitis
                                                                             Scrotal and/or testicular trauma, with hematoma or rupture
                                                                             Spermatocele

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                             Testicular tumors: seminomatous, nonseminomatous
                                                                             Varicocele

                                What tests and/or imaging tools            None. Testicular torsion is a clinical diagnosis and imaging studies
                                 could be used to conﬁrm the                are not necessary when history and physical exam strongly suggest this
                                 diagnosis?                                 diagnosis. However, testicular ultrasound is often used for evaluation if
                                                                            the diagnosis remains questionable.
                                What is the most appropriate               Manual detorsion (turning the testicle medial to lateral 180 degrees
                                 treatment for this condition?              2–3 times to relieve pain) and emergent urologic consultation for
                                                                            surgical detorsion and orchiopexy to avoid loss of testicular tissue.
                                                                            “Time is testicle.” Administer analgesia with caution as it may bias
                                                                            future physical exams.
                                What are possible adverse                  Poor outcomes include infarction and loss of the testicle, infertility,
                                 outcomes of this condition?                infection, and cosmetic deformity.
                                What risk factors are associated           Patients have an inappropriately high attachment of the tunica
                                 with an increased incidence of             vaginalis that covers the testicle, called the bell clapper deformity. The
                                 this condition?                            testicle can rotate freely, so the long axis of the testicle may be oriented
                                                                            transversely rather than craniocaudal. Other suspected associations
                                                                            include having an undescended testicle, sexual arousal and/or activity,
                                                                            trauma, exercise, active cremaster reﬂex, and cold weather.

                               516
 CASE 17                   A 25-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by ambulance after a motor
                            vehicle collision. The paramedics report that his vehicle, which was not equipped with
                            airbags, hit a telephone pole at 35 mph. His temperature is 37.0° C (98.6° F), heart
                            rate is 91/min, respiratory rate is 13/min, and blood pressure is 116/78 mm Hg. He is
                            alert and oriented to person and place, but does not recall the date or any of the events
                            leading up to the accident. He also reports that he feels very dizzy whenever he looks up
                            at the ceiling. Examination of the head and neck reveals slight enophthalmos of the left
                            orbit with infraorbital and upper lip anesthesia.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Orbital fracture. Blowout fractures are the result of blunt trauma to the
                                          globe with rapid expansion of the orbital contents and rupture through
                                          the bony ﬂoor. A blowout fracture can also be the result of a direct blow
                                          to the orbital rim.

 What is the epidemiology of this        Facial fractures secondary to motor vehicle and recreational accidents
  condition?                              are more common in rural areas, whereas penetrating trauma and
                                          assault-related injuries are more common in urban populations.
                                          Domestic violence and abuse should always be considered as a possible
                                          cause of the injury.
 How is this condition classiﬁed?        Orbital fractures are classiﬁed in terms of anatomical considerations:
                                           Internal orbital fracture: blow-out or blow-in fractures.

                                                                                                                        E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                           Orbital apex fracture: involving the orbital rim (superior, inferior,
                                            lateral).
                                           Associated with other fractures of the facial skeleton.

 What other symptoms are                 Diplopia on upward gaze suggests inferior rectus muscle entrapment
  common in patients with this            but the etiology may be multifactorial. Infraorbital anesthesia is the
  condition?                              result of a contused infraorbital nerve. Anesthesia of the maxillary teeth
                                          and upper lip is common. Rarely, patients demonstrate enophthalmos,
                                          or a sunken globe, when a large section of the globe has ruptured.
                                          Occasionally, a stepoff deformity can be palpated over the infraorbital
                                          rim or subcutaneous emphysema results from fracture into a sinus or
                                          nasal antrum.
 What tests and/or imaging tools         Plain ﬁlms are useful in the diagnosis of blowout fractures. The
  could be used to conﬁrm the             “hanging teardrop” sign suggests orbital fat herniating into the maxillary
  diagnosis?                              sinus. Once a blowout fracture is suspected, CT scan of the face with
                                          coronal sections is the modality of choice and can be used to determine
                                          the surface area of the broken orbital ﬂoor.
 What is the most appropriate            All orbital fractures may have repair delayed for 1–2 weeks; however,
  treatment for this condition?           opinions regarding surgical repair vary among providers. Antibiotics
                                          against sinus pathogens are recommended for patients with
                                          subcutaneous emphysema.

                                                                                                                517
                                CASE 18                    A 72-year-old woman with a history of atrial ﬁbrillation and gout is brought to the
                                                            emergency department with severe pain throughout her abdomen. She was watching
                                                            television when the pain began very suddenly and quickly became the worst pain
                                                            she has ever experienced. She also reports having the sudden urge to defecate after
                                                            the onset of the pain. She describes the pain as “knifelike,” and nothing improves or
                                                            worsens the pain. She also denies radiation of the pain, chest pain, shortness of breath,
                                                            blood in her stool, vomiting, or change in dietary habits. Her physical examination
                                                            reveals a well-developed, well-nourished elderly woman writhing on the bed. She has a
                                                            temperature of 37.5° C (99.5° F), blood pressure of 155/100 mm Hg, an irregular pulse
                                                            rate of 90/min, a respiratory rate of 14/min, and an oxygen saturation of 98% on room
                                                            air. Her physical examination is remarkable for an irregularly irregular heart rhythm,
                                                            mild tenderness to palpation in the periumbilical region, and minimal bowel sounds,
                                                            but no rebound, guarding, or ﬂank tenderness. Her rectal exam is guaiac negative. Her
                                                            pelvic examination is unremarkable.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?        Acute mesenteric ischemia (AMI) occurs in patients over the age
                                                                           of 60. It has three possible etiologies: embolic (often a cardiac
                                                                           thrombus occluding the SMA), thrombotic (in settings of underlying
                                                                           atherosclerotic disease, a thrombus forms in two splanchnic vessels),
                                                                           and nonocclusive (severe and prolonged intestinal vasoconstriction
                                                                           in systemic illness and cardiac shock). Patients will typically present
                                                                           with pain out of proportion to their physical exam. Given this patient’s

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                           active atrial ﬁbrillation, AMI from a mesenteric artery embolus is the
                                                                           likely etiology.

                                What conditions should be                  Aortic aneurysm rupture
                                 included in the differential               Intestinal obstruction
                                 diagnosis?                                 Peritonitis
                                                                            Cholangitis
                                                                            Cholecystitis and biliary colic
                                                                            Appendicitis
                                                                            Pancreatitis

                                What risk factors are associated           Advanced age
                                 with an increased incidence of             Atherosclerosis
                                 this condition?                            Cardiac arrhythmias
                                                                            Intra-abdominal malignancy
                                                                            Low cardiac output states
                                                                            Recent myocardial infarction
                                                                            Severe cardiac valvular disease

                                What are the typical laboratory           Patients with acute abdominal pain and metabolic acidosis have
                                 ﬁndings in this condition?                intestinal ischemia until proven otherwise. Lab ﬁndings frequently
                                                                           include leukocytosis, elevated hematocrit (hemoconcentration), and
                                                                           metabolic acidosis (ischemia). However, mesenteric ischemia may exist
                                                                           even in the presence of normal lab values.
                                What tests and/or imaging tools           CT scan is the diagnostic test of choice if suspicion of AMI is high.
                                 could be used to conﬁrm the               Angiography is the gold standard of diagnostic tests. Despite being
                                 diagnosis?                                highly invasive and not suitable for critically ill patients, it allows for
                                                                           treatment with thrombolytics at the site of occlusion.

                               518
 CASE 19                   A 22-year-old woman is brought to the emergency department following a motor
                            vehicle collision in which she was an unrestrained driver. Paramedics report she was
                            driving a four-door sedan that was “T-boned” on the driver’s side. She denied any
                            allergies or pertinent medical history before becoming unconscious at the scene.
                            Physical exam at that time showed a mechanically unstable pelvic girdle and a systolic
                            blood pressure of 80 mm Hg.

 What is the most likely diagnosis?      Mechanically and hemodynamically unstable pelvic fracture,
                                          speciﬁcally a lateral compression fracture as she was hit from the
                                          side. Hemorrhage is a common cause of death in patients with pelvic
                                          fractures, as up to 4 L of blood can accumulate in the retroperitoneal
                                          space before a self-limiting tamponade occurs.

 What is the “primary survey”?           This primary survey helps to triage and manage acutely unstable
                                          patients. It can be remembered using the mnemonic ABCDE:
                                          Airway/Breathing (maintaining cervical spine precautions): Visualize
                                          and auscultate an adequate respiratory effort by the patient. Establish a
                                          patent and deﬁnitive airway and adequate oxygenation and ventilation.
                                          Circulation/Compression of bleeding wound: Place two large-bore
                                          peripheral IVs and use 3:1 isotonic ﬂuid resuscitation or 1:1 blood
                                          product resuscitation for blood loss; monitor blood pressure frequently,
                                          and compress bleeding wounds.

                                                                                                                       E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                          Disability: Assess neurologic status using the Glasgow Coma Scale
                                          (GCS).
                                          Exposure: Completely disrobe patient to assess for occult injuries and
                                          temperature status.
                                          Causes of immediate death can frequently be ruled out by this
                                          survey, including tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade, airway
                                          obstruction, aortic disruption, exsanguination, and hemothorax.
 What is the “secondary survey”?         The secondary survey is undertaken after the patient is initially
                                          stabilized. It consists of a full physical examination, a “trauma series”
                                          (anteroposterior chest radiograph, anteroposterior pelvic radiograph,
                                          anteroposterior/lateral/odontoid radiograph of the cervical spine),
                                          placement of a Foley catheter (after ruling out urethral injury), and
                                          pertinent laboratory studies.
 What is the most appropriate            Perform a focused abdominal sonography for trauma (FAST) exam to
  treatment for this condition?           rule out intraperitoneal and intrapericardial hemorrhage. The pelvis
                                          must be mechanically stabilized in order to manage bleeding. Give
                                          analgesics and begin massive volume resuscitation with intravenous
                                          ﬂuids (lactated Ringer’s solution, normal saline, and/or blood products)
                                          via large-bore peripheral IVs. Place a Foley catheter only when
                                          urethral damage has been ruled out by physical exam or retrograde
                                          urethrography. A CT scan should be done as soon as practical. Consult
                                          an orthopedic surgeon once the fracture is diagnosed. Continued blood
                                          loss is an indication for angiography and embolization of bleeding
                                          vessels, as open surgical exploration is fraught with morbidity and
                                          mortality in hemodynamically unstable patients.

                                                                                                                 519
                                CASE 20                   A 20-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by ambulance after being
                                                           stabbed in the neck. The paramedics at the scene report that neither the assailant
                                                           nor the weapon was present upon their arrival. Physical examination reveals an oral
                                                           temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F), a pulse of 115/min, a respiratory rate of 19/min, and a
                                                           blood pressure of 106/64 mm Hg. He is able to speak without difﬁculty and is oriented
                                                           to person, place, and time. The stab wound is horizontal and approximately 3 cm long
                                                           on the left side of the neck below the angle of the mandible and above the inferior
                                                           cricoid cartilage. Although it appears that the weapon penetrated the platysma muscle,
                                                           the wound does not appear to be actively bleeding. No other injuries are noted.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Penetrating neck trauma occurs when a missile or sharp object
                                                                          pierces the platysma. The two most immediate concerns are massive
                                                                          hemorrhage and airway compromise due to an expanding hematoma.
                                                                          Beyond these considerations, management is dictated by the cause of
                                                                          the injury, the patient’s condition, and the anatomic location of the
                                                                          wound.

                                How is this condition classiﬁed?         Penetrating neck wounds are described by their anatomic location, as
                                                                          shown in Figure 17-4:
                                                                           Zone I: bordered by the suprasternal notch, clavicles, and inferior
                                                                            aspect of the cricoid cartilage.
                                                                           Zone II: between the inferior cricoid cartilage and the angle of the

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                            mandible.
                                                                           Zone III: between the angle of the mandible and the base of the
                                                                            skull.
                                What is the most appropriate             Patients who are actively bleeding should be taken immediately to the
                                 treatment for this condition?            operating room for surgical exploration. Stable patients with wounds
                                                                          that penetrate the platysma muscle are managed based on the function
                                                                          of the zone of the neck affected. There is no role for probing or local
                                                                          exploration of the neck in the emergency department, as this could
                                                                          dislodge a clot and initiate uncontrollable hemorrhage. All patients
                                                                          should undergo esophageal evaluations to rule out injury.
                                                                           Zone I injuries: often associated with injury to the great vessels and
                                                                            require imaging to exclude major arterial injury. Angiography is
                                                                            considered to be the gold standard.
                                                                           Zone II injuries: usually evaluated surgically. May image the vessels
                                                                            and nonvascular structures.
                                                                           Zone III injuries: preoperative imaging of the injury is important as
                                                                            surgical exploration may be difﬁcult.
                                                                          This patient has suffered a penetrating injury to zone II. Since he is
                                                                          stable, the affected area can be imaged to determine whether surgery
                                                                          is warranted. If the penetrating instrument had remained in place, the
                                                                          wound would be imaged and the patient sent to surgery for removal
                                                                          and treatment. If the patient had suffered a bullet wound, imaging
                                                                          would be critical, as injury can result distant from the point of entry.

                               520
             Angle of mandible                              Zone III

                                                            Zone II
             Cricoid cartilage
                                                            Zone I

F I G U R E 17- 4 .   Zones of the neck. (Reproduced, with permission, from
Stone CK, Humphries RL. Current Emergency Diagnosis & Treatment. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2004: Fig. 38-1).

                                                                                E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E

                                                                          521
                                CASE 21                    A 61-year-old man is brought to the emergency department by his daughter because of
                                                            difﬁculty walking. His daughter reports that 2 days ago she noticed that his steps were
                                                            very short and that he could not walk a distance of more than 5 feet without staggering.
                                                            She assumed that her father’s symptoms were the result of another drinking binge, but
                                                            when they did not resolve with time, she decided to seek medical attention. Physical
                                                            examination reveals an oral temperature of 37.0° C (98.6° F), a pulse rate of 84/min,
                                                            and a blood pressure of 122/74 mm Hg. The patient appears distracted and is oriented
                                                            to person only. Neurological examination reveals bilateral horizontal nystagmus on
                                                            lateral gaze, diminished pain and vibratory sensation below the knee bilaterally, and a
                                                            wide-based gait with slow, short-spaced steps. Blood alcohol concentration is 18 mg/dL.
                                                            A cardiac examination is within normal limits.

                                What is the most likely diagnosis?       Wernicke’s encephalopathy secondary to thiamine deﬁciency.
                                                                          Wernicke’s encephalopathy is an acute neurologic disorder caused
                                                                          by thiamine deﬁciency and characterized by the classic triad of
                                                                          encephalopathy, oculomotor dysfunction, and gait ataxia. However,
                                                                          all 3 manifestations are found in only about one-third of cases. The
                                                                          majority of affected patients are alcoholics, with an incidence as high
                                                                          as 12.5%.

                                What is the pathogenesis of this         Thiamine deﬁciency in alcohol abusers results from a combination
                                 condition?                               of inadequate dietary intake, reduced intestinal absorption, decreased

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                                                          hepatic storage, and impaired utilization. Wernicke’s encephalopathy
                                                                          also occurs in nonalcoholic patients with malnutrition due to vomiting,
                                                                          starvation, bariatric surgery, dialysis, malignancy, and AIDS. The
                                                                          mechanism by which thiamine deﬁciency causes brain lesions is
                                                                          unclear.
                                What other neurologic syndrome           Alcoholics with untreated or incompletely treated Wernicke’s
                                 can this patient expect to develop       encephalopathy may develop Korsakoff syndrome, a neuropsychiatric
                                 over time?                               disorder of selective anterograde and retrograde amnesia.
                                What conditions should be                All patients with gait disturbances should be evaluated for acute strokes
                                 included in the differential             and hemorrhages, particularly cerebellar hemorrhage and subdural
                                 diagnosis?                               hematomas. Additionally, thiamine deﬁciency can also result in adult
                                                                          dry beriberi (characterized by a symmetric peripheral sensory and
                                                                          motor neuropathy affecting the distal extremities) or wet beriberi
                                                                          (characterized by neuropathy with signs of cardiac involvement). Signs
                                                                          associated with wet beriberi include cardiomegaly, congestive heart
                                                                          failure, peripheral edema, and tachycardia.
                                What tests and/or imaging tools          Wernicke’s encephalopathy is a clinical diagnosis; there are no
                                 could be used to conﬁrm the              laboratory studies that are diagnostic. Thiamine deﬁciency can be
                                 diagnosis?                               detected by measurement of erythrocyte thiamine transketolase;
                                                                          however, such measurements are not necessary for diagnostic or
                                                                          treatment purposes. Diagnostic imaging is not necessary in all patients,
                                                                          but magnetic resonance imaging can be helpful in difﬁcult cases.

                               522
 What is the most appropriate         In the acute setting, administration of both parenteral glucose solution
  treatment for this condition?        and thiamine are recommended. Parenteral magnesium sulfate may
                                       be necessary also, as patients will not respond to thiamine in the setting
                                       of hypomagnesemia. High-dose oral thiamine supplementation should
                                       continue after parenteral treatment is complete.
 What is the prognosis for patients   Improvement in ocular impairments should be seen within hours to
  with this condition?                 days and improvement in ataxia and confusion within days to 1 week.
                                       Despite appropriate treatment, most patients are left with permanent
                                       symptoms of thiamine deﬁciency; only 20% fully recover.

                                                                                                                    E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E

                                                                                                             523
                                CASE 22                      A 35-year-old man is brought by ambulance to the trauma bay of the emergency
                                                              department. The paramedic team reports that he appears to have been shot in the
                                                              abdomen and had an unknown amount of blood loss at the scene. No other history
                                                              surrounding the incident is known. His initial trauma survey reveals a temperature of
                                                              37.5° C (99.5° F), blood pressure of 90/60 mm Hg, a pulse rate of 110/min, a respiratory
                                                              rate of 18/min, and an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air.

                                What is the next step in                   In all trauma patients, the primary survey is the ﬁrst set of diagnostic
                                 management for this patient?               and treatment steps that must be done (airway, breathing, circulation,
                                                                            disability, exposure). It is important to ensure ventilatory and
                                                                            hemodynamic stability immediately. This patient needs immediate
                                                                            ﬂuid resuscitation with intravenous lactated Ringer’s, normal saline
                                                                            solution, or colloid (packed red blood cells) through large-bore
                                                                            peripheral IVs.

                                What factor(s) determine the               This patient will need an emergent exploratory laparotomy to
                                 order of subsequent steps?                 thoroughly assess any organ damage. Imaging prior to surgery depends
                                                                            on patient stability; portable x-rays of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis
                                                                            may be taken before the laparotomy, if the patient is too unstable for
                                                                            the CT scanner.
                                What is “damage control”                   ”Damage control” surgery is management that identiﬁes the most

E M E RG E NCY M E DIC I N E
                                 surgery?                                   immediately life-threatening injuries and prioritizes their repair. In
                                                                            penetrating abdominal trauma, organs that have the largest surface area
                                                                            when viewed from the anterior aspect of the body tend to be injured
                                                                            most frequently (i.e., small bowel, liver, colon), and accompanying
                                                                            vascular injuries are much more common than in blunt trauma.
                                What system could be used to               Though there are several systems, the APACHE II system is probably
                                 assess or classify this patient’s          the most widely used in the United States, and uses underlying health,
                                 health upon entering the                   chronic disease states, and physiological variables to calculate a
                                 intensive care unit?                       predicted mortality risk for the ﬁrst 24 hours of admission.
                                What adverse events are possible            Transfusion-related complications (hypothermia, coagulopathy,
                                 following surgery?                           hypocalcemia, acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome,
                                                                              multiple organ failure).
                                                                             Contrast media–associated nephropathy.
                                                                             Deep venous thrombosis (DVT)/pulmonary embolus.
                                                                             Gastric stress ulcers.

                                What prophylactic measures                  To prevent transfusion-related complications, warm blood
                                 should be used to prevent these              adequately, closely monitor coagulation studies (as well as ionized
                                 adverse events?                              calcium levels), and treat with calcium gluconate as indicated.
                                                                             To prevent contrast media–associated nephropathy, prehydrate
                                                                              patients for several hours with normal saline plus sodium
                                                                              bicarbonate. In patients with chronic renal failure, use nonionic
                                                                              contrast agent and prehydrate with normal saline and acetylcystine.
                                                                             To prevent DVT/pulmonary embolus, use subcutaneous heparin,
                                                                              pneumatic compression devices, and/or surveillance duplex
                                                                              ultrasound, depending on risk factors.
                                                                             To prevent gastric stress ulcers, use oral proton pump inhibitors
                                                                              in patients with nasogastric or orogastric tubes; otherwise, use
                                                                              intravenous H2-blockers.

                               524
 APPENDIX

CASE INDEX

CASE TITLE                                 CHAPTER                                 PAGE

Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm                  Cardiovascular                            2
Abortion                                   Obstetrics                              292
Abuse                                      Pediatrics                              360
Acanthosis Nigricans                       Dermatology                              44
Acetaminophen Overdose                     Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   494
Achalasia                                  Gastrointestinal                        134
Acid-Base Disorders                        Renal/Genitourinary                     460
Acne Vulgaris                              Dermatology                              46
Acromegaly                                 Endocrinology                            72
Acute Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema          Cardiovascular                            3
Acute Cholecystitis                        Gastrointestinal                        130
Acute Coronary Syndrome                    Cardiovascular                            4
Acute Interstitial Nephritis               Renal/Genitourinary                     461
Acute Kidney Injury                        Renal/Genitourinary                     462
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia               Hematology/Oncology                     166
Acute Myelogenous Leukemia                 Hematology/Oncology                     164
Acute Myocardial Infarction—
   Long-Term Management                    Cardiovascular                            8
Acute Pancreatitis                         Gastrointestinal                        132
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome        Pulmonary                               434
Acute Respiratory Failure                  Pulmonary                               436
Acute Tubular Injury                       Renal/Genitourinary                     464
Adrenal Insufﬁciency (Addison’s Disease)   Endocrinology                            76
Alcoholism                                 Psychiatry                              404
Amenorrhea, Primary                        Gynecology                              328
Amenorrhea, Secondary                      Gynecology                              330
Amphetamine Intoxication                   Psychiatry                              402
Amyloidosis                                Hematology/Oncology                     167
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis              Neurology                               250
Anaphylactic Shock                         Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   495
Ankylosing Spondylitis                     Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   220
Anorexia Nervosa                           Psychiatry                              405
Aortic Dissection                          Cardiovascular                            6
Aortic Regurgitation                       Cardiovascular                            9
Aortic Stenosis                            Cardiovascular                           21
Appendicitis, Acute                        Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   496
Asthma                                     Pulmonary                               438
Atopic Dermatitis                          Dermatology                              47
Atrial Fibrillation                        Cardiovascular                           10
Atrial Fibrillation                        Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   502
Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder    Psychiatry                              406
Atypical Pneumonia                         Pulmonary                               440
Autism                                     Psychiatry                              407
AZT-Induced Anemia                         Infectious Disease                      196
                                                                                   525
CASE TITLE                               CHAPTER                                 PAGE

Bacterial Vaginosis                      Gynecology                              332
Basal Cell Carcinoma                     Dermatology                              48
Benign Positional Paroxysmal Vertigo     Neurology                               254
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia             Renal/Genitourinary                     466
Bias and Confounding                     Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    102
Bioterrorism                             Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    104
Bipolar I                                Psychiatry                              423
Bites, Animal and Human                  Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   498
Breast Cancer                            Gynecology                              331
Breast Cancer Screening                  Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    106
Bulimia                                  Psychiatry                              408
Bullous Pemphigoid                       Dermatology                              50
Burn, Thermal                            Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   500

Carbon Monoxide Poisoning                Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   503
Carcinoid                                Gastrointestinal                        135
Cardiac Arrest                           Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   504
Cardiac Tamponade                        Cardiovascular                           12
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome                   Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   222
Celiac Disease                           Gastrointestinal                        138
Cervical Cancer                          Gynecology                              334
Cervicitis                               Gynecology                              347
Chancroid                                Gynecology                              336
Chlamydia                                Infectious Disease                      197
Chronic Granulomatous Disease            Pediatrics                              362
Chronic Kidney Disease                   Renal/Genitourinary                     468
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia             Hematology/Oncology                     168
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease    Pulmonary                               441
Cocaine Dependence                       Psychiatry                              410
Cohort Studies                           Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    108
Colorectal Cancer                        Gastrointestinal                        136
Compartment Syndrome                     Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   223
Conduct Disorder                         Psychiatry                              412
Conﬁdentially and Disclosure             Ethics and Legal Issues                 124
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia           Pediatrics                              364
Congenital Infections                    Pediatrics                              365
Congestive Heart Failure                 Cardiovascular                           14
Contraception                            Obstetrics                              293
Crohn’s Disease                          Pediatrics                              366
Croup                                    Pediatrics                              370
Cushing’s Syndrome                       Endocrinology                            74

Deep Vein Thrombosis                     Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   505
Deep Venous Thrombosis                   Cardiovascular                           16
Deep Venous Thrombosis                   Obstetrics                              294
Delirium                                 Psychiatry                              413
Dementia                                 Neurology                               256
Dermatomyositis                          Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   224
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip       Pediatrics                              368
Developmental Milestones                 Pediatrics                              371
Diabetes Inspidus                        Endocrinology                            77
Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1                Endocrinology                            78
Diabetic Ketoacidosis                    Endocrinology                            79
Diastolic Heart Failure                  Cardiovascular                           20
Dilated Cardiomyopathy (Alcoholic)       Cardiovascular                           18
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation   Obstetrics                              295

526
CASE TITLE                                    CHAPTER                                 PAGE

Dissociative Fugue                            Psychiatry                              414
Diverticulitis                                Gastrointestinal                        139
Domestic Violence                             Psychiatry                              415
Down Syndrome                                 Pediatrics                              372
Drowning                                      Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   506
Duchenne's Muscular Dystrophy                 Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   225
Duodenal Atresia                              Pediatrics                              374

Ectopic Pregnancy                             Obstetrics                              296
Emphysema                                     Pulmonary                               442
Endocarditis                                  Infectious Disease                      200
End-of-Life Issues (Advance Directives        Ethics and Legal Issues                 125
  and Withdrawal of Care)
Endometriosis                                 Gynecology                              340
Epidural Abscess                              Neurology                               258
Epidural Hematoma                             Neurology                               260
Erectile Dysfunction                          Renal/Genitourinary                     470
Esophageal Carcinoma                          Gastrointestinal                        140

Factitious Disorder                           Psychiatry                              416
Factor V Leiden                               Hematology/Oncology                     170
Failure to Thrive                             Pediatrics                              376
Fanconi’s Anemia                              Hematology/Oncology                     171
Febrile Seizure                               Pediatrics                              377
Fetal Monitoring                              Obstetrics                              298
Fibrocystic Breast Disease                    Gynecology                              338
Fibroids                                      Gynecology                              342
Fibromyalgia                                  Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   229

Gastroesophageal Reﬂux Disease                Gastrointestinal                        141
Generalized Anxiety Disorder                  Psychiatry                              417
Genital Warts                                 Gynecology                              344
Gestational Diabetes                          Obstetrics                              300
Glaucoma                                      Neurology                               262
Glioblastoma Multiforme                       Neurology                               264
Glomerulonephritis                            Renal/Genitourinary                     472
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deﬁciency   Hematology/Oncology                     172
Gonococcal Infection                          Infectious Disease                      201
Gout                                          Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   228
Guillain-Barré Syndrome                       Neurology                               266

Hairy Cell Leukemia                           Hematology/Oncology                     174
Headache                                      Neurology                               267
Health Care Screening                         Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    109
Hemochromatosis                               Gastrointestinal                        142
Hemophilia                                    Hematology/Oncology                     175
Hemorrhage, Drug-Induced                      Hematology/Oncology                     178
Henoch-Schönlein Purpura                      Pediatrics                              378
Herniated Lumbar Disk                         Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   226
Herpes Simplex                                Dermatology                              51
Hiatal Hernia                                 Gastrointestinal                        144
Hidradenitis Suppurativa                      Dermatology                              52
Hirschsprung Disease                          Pediatrics                              380
Histoplasmosis                                Infectious Disease                      202
Hodgkin’s Lymphoma                            Hematology/Oncology                     182
Huntington’s Disease                          Neurology                               268

                                                                                        527
CASE TITLE                                    CHAPTER                                 PAGE

Hydatidiform Mole                             Obstetrics                              302
Hypercalcemia of Malignancy                   Renal/Genitourinary                     474
Hypercholesterolemia                          Cardiovascular                           22
Hyperkalemia                                  Renal/Genitourinary                     476
Hypernatremia                                 Renal/Genitourinary                     478
Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State              Renal/Genitourinary                     479
Hyperparathyroidism                           Endocrinology                            84
Hypertension                                  Obstetrics                              303
Hypertension—Essential                        Cardiovascular                           23
Hypertension—Renal Artery Stenosis            Cardiovascular                           24
Hyperthyroidism (Graves’ Disease)             Endocrinology                            80
Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy       Cardiovascular                           26
Hypocalcemia                                  Renal/Genitourinary                     480
Hypokalemia (Hyperaldosteronism)              Endocrinology                            82
Hypothyroidism (Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis)      Endocrinology                            85

Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis                 Pulmonary                               444
Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura           Hematology/Oncology                     183
Incidence and Prevalence                      Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    110
Infantile Spasms                              Neurology                               269
Infectious Mononucleosis                      Infectious Disease                      204
Infective Endocarditis                        Cardiovascular                           30
Infertility                                   Obstetrics                              304
Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease                     Gastrointestinal                        146
Inﬂuenza Vaccine                              Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    112
Informed Consent                              Ethics and Legal Issues                 126
Internuclear Ophthalmoplegia                  Neurology                               252
Intussusception                               Pediatrics                              382
Irritable Bowel Syndrome                      Gastrointestinal                        150
Isoimmunization                               Obstetrics                              305

Juvenile Rheumatic Arthritis                  Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   230

Kaposi Sarcoma                                Dermatology                              53
Kawasaki Disease                              Pediatrics                              384

Legg-Calvé-Perthes Disease                    Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   231
Lichen Planus                                 Dermatology                              54
Liver Cirrhosis                               Gastrointestinal                        148
Lung Cancer                                   Pulmonary                               443
Lyme Disease                                  Infectious Disease                      206

Major Depression                              Psychiatry                              418
Malaria                                       Infectious Disease                      208
Mastitis                                      Obstetrics                              306
Melanoma                                      Dermatology                              70
Meningitis                                    Neurology                               270
Meningitis                                    Pediatrics                              385
Menopause                                     Gynecology                              345
Mesenteric Ischemia, Acute                    Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   518
Mesothelioma                                  Pulmonary                               446
Metabolic syndrome                            Endocrinology                            88
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus   Infectious Disease                      209
Microcytic Anemia                             Hematology/Oncology                     180
Minors                                        Ethics and Legal Issues                 127
Mitral Regurgitation                          Cardiovascular                           28

528
CASE TITLE                              CHAPTER                                 PAGE

Molluscum Contagiosum                   Dermatology                              56
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type I    Endocrinology                            86
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type II   Endocrinology                            89
Multiple Myeloma                        Hematology/Oncology                     184
Multiple Sclerosis                      Neurology                               272
Myasthenia Gravis                       Neurology                               275
Myocardial Infarction                   Cardiovascular                           32

Necrotizing Enterocolitis               Pediatrics                              386
Necrotizing Fasciitis                   Infectious Disease                      210
Nephrolithiasis                         Renal/Genitourinary                     482
Nephrotic Syndrome                      Renal/Genitourinary                     483
Neutropenia                             Hematology/Oncology                     186
Neutropenic Fever                       Infectious Disease                      212
Normal Labor                            Obstetrics                              307
Normal Physiology of Pregnancy          Obstetrics                              308
Nutrition in Pregnancy                  Obstetrics                              309

Obesity Effects on Health               Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    114
Omphalocele                             Pediatrics                              387
Onychomycosis                           Dermatology                              69
Opioid Withdrawal                       Psychiatry                              422
Organophosphate Poisoning, Acute        Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   508
Osteoarthritis                          Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   234
Osteomyelitis                           Infectious Disease                      214
Osteoporosis                            Endocrinology                            90
Osteosarcoma                            Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   238
Otitis Media                            Pediatrics                              388
Ovarian Cancer                          Gynecology                              346

Paget’s Disease of Bone                 Endocrinology                            92
Papillary Muscle Rupture                Cardiovascular                           34
Parkinson’s Disease                     Neurology                               278
Partial Complex Seizures                Neurology                               281
Pelvic Inﬂammatory Disease              Gynecology                              348
Pemphigus                               Dermatology                              58
Peptic Ulcer Disease                    Gastrointestinal                        151
Pericarditis                            Cardiovascular                           36
Perineal Laceration                     Obstetrics                              312
Peripheral Vascular Disease             Cardiovascular                           37
Personality Disorder, Cluster A         Psychiatry                              420
Personality Disorder, Cluster B         Psychiatry                              424
Personality Disorder, Cluster C         Psychiatry                              425
Pheochromocytoma                        Endocrinology                            94
Physiologic Jaundice                    Pediatrics                              389
Pityriasis Rosea                        Dermatology                              60
Placenta Previa                         Obstetrics                              313
Placental Abruption                     Obstetrics                              310
Pleural Effusion                        Pulmonary                               448
Pneumocystosis                          Infectious Disease                      198
Pneumothorax                            Pulmonary                               450
Polycystic Kidney Disease               Renal/Genitourinary                     484
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome             Gynecology                              350
Polycythemia                            Hematology/Oncology                     190
Polymyalgia Rheumatica                  Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   240
Porphyria                               Hematology/Oncology                     191

                                                                                  529
CASE TITLE                               CHAPTER                                 PAGE

Positive Predictive Value,               Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    121
   and Negative Predictive Value
Postmenopausal Bleeding                  Gynecology                              351
Postpartum Hemorrhage                    Obstetrics                              316
Postpartum Infection                     Obstetrics                              314
Postterm Pregnancy                       Obstetrics                              318
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder            Psychiatry                              428
Preeclampsia                             Obstetrics                              317
Prenatal Screening                       Obstetrics                              320
Preterm Labor                            Obstetrics                              321
Preterm Premature Rupture of Membranes   Obstetrics                              322
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis           Gastrointestinal                        152
Primary Syphilis                         Gynecology                              352
Pseudomembranous Colitis                 Gastrointestinal                        153
Psoriasis                                Dermatology                              62
Pulmonary Embolus                        Pulmonary                               447
Pulmonary Hypertension                   Pulmonary                               452
Pyelonephritis                           Obstetrics                              323
Pyloric Stenosis                         Pediatrics                              390

Randomized Clinical Trial                Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    116
Reliability and Validity                 Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    120
Renal Cell Carcinoma                     Renal/Genitourinary                     486
Renal Tubular Acidosis                   Renal/Genitourinary                     487
Renovascular Hypertension/               Renal/Genitourinary                     488
  Secondary Hypertension
Respiratory Distress in the Newborn      Pediatrics                              391
Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection    Pediatrics                              392
Retinal Detachment                       Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   510
Rheumatoid Arthritis                     Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   244
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever             Infectious Disease                      215

Sarcoidosis                              Pulmonary                               453
Schizophrenia                            Psychiatry                              426
Scleroderma                              Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   245
Second-Degree Heart Block                Cardiovascular                           38
Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity               Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine    118
Sepsis                                   Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   514
Septic Arthritis                         Infectious Disease                      216
Sheehan’s Syndrome                       Obstetrics                              326
Sickle Cell Anemia                       Hematology/Oncology                     176
Sleep Apnea                              Pulmonary                               458
Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis        Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   242
Small Bowel Obstruction                  Gastrointestinal                        154
Somatization Disorder                    Psychiatry                              429
Spinal Stenosis                          Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   232
Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis        Gastrointestinal                        156
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome                 Dermatology                              64
Stroke                                   Neurology                               276
Subacute Combined Degeneration           Neurology                               282
Subacute Granulomatous Thyroiditis       Endocrinology                           100
   (de Quervain’s thyroiditis)
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage                  Neurology                               284
Subdural Hematoma                        Neurology                               286
Suicidal Ideation                        Psychiatry                              432
Supraventricular Tachycardia             Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   512

530
CASE TITLE                               CHAPTER                                 PAGE

Syncope                                  Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   515
Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic   Endocrinology                            96
   Hormone Secretion
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus             Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   246

Tabes Dorsalis                           Neurology                               290
Takayasu Arteritis                       Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   247
Tay-Sachs Disease                        Pediatrics                              393
Temporal Arteritis                       Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue   236
Testicular Cancer                        Renal/Genitourinary                     490
Testicular Torsion                       Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   516
Tetralogy of Fallot                      Pediatrics                              394
Thalassemia                              Hematology/Oncology                     192
Thrombophlebitis                         Infectious Disease                      217
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura      Hematology/Oncology                     188
   with Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
Thyroid Nodule                           Endocrinology                            98
Tonic-Clonic Seizures                    Neurology                               288
TORCH Infections                         Obstetrics                              324
Tourette’s Syndrome                      Psychiatry                              430
Toxic Shock Syndrome                     Gynecology                              353
Transplant Rejection                     Hematology/Oncology                     193
Trauma, Fracture, Orbital                Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   517
Trauma, Fracture, Pelvis                 Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   519
Trauma, Penetrating, Abdomen             Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   524
Trauma, Penetrating, Neck                Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   520
Traumatic Urethral Injury                Renal/Genitourinary                     491
Trichomonas                              Gynecology                              354
Tuberculosis                             Pulmonary                               454
Tuberous Sclerosis                       Dermatology                              68

Urinary Incontinence                     Gynecology                              356
Urinary Tract Infection                  Infectious Disease                      218

Varicella                                Pediatrics                              396
Varicella-Zoster Virus                   Dermatology                              66
Ventricular Septal Defect                Pediatrics                              398
Viral Hepatitis                          Gastrointestinal                        157
Von Willebrand’s Disease                 Hematology/Oncology                     194
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis                 Gynecology                              357

Wegener’s Granulomatosis                 Pulmonary                               456
Wernicke’s Encephalopathy                Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine   522
Wilms’ Tumor                             Pediatrics                              399
Wilson’s Disease                         Gastrointestinal                        160
Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome           Cardiovascular                           40

Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome               Gastrointestinal                        162

                                                                                   531
      N OT E S

532
Index

A                                       postrenal (obstructive), 466–        Amnioinfusion, 299
                                               467                           Amphetamine intoxication, 402–
A-a gradient, 436
                                      Acute respiratory distress syndrome           403
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
                                               (ARDS), 434–435, 507          Amyloidosis, 20, 167, 222, 483
       (AAA), 2
                                      Acute respiratory failure, 436–437     Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Abnormal squamous cells of unde-
                                      Acute tubular injury (ATI), 464–              (ALS), 250–25
       termined signiﬁcance
                                               465. See also Acute tubular   Anaphylactic shock, 495
       (ASCUS), 335
Abortion, 292                                  necrosis                      Anasarca, 483
Acanthosis, 63                          distinguishing from prerenal dis-    Androgen insensitivity, 328
Acanthosis nigricans (AN), 44–45               ease, 465                     Anemia
ACE inhibitors, 8, 15, 19, 20, 23,    Acute tubular necrosis, 205, 461,        autoimmune hemolytic, 201
       78, 488–489                             507. See also Acute tubular     AZT-induced, 196
Acetaminophen overdose, 494                    injury                          Fanconi’s (FA), 171
Achalasia, 134                        Addison’s disease, 76                    iron-deﬁciency, 178–179
Acid-base disorders, 460              Adenomatous polyposis (APC), 136         pregnancy-related, 309
Acid reﬂux, in pregnancy, 308         Adrenal insufﬁciency, 76, 96             sickle cell, 16, 186–187
Acne vulgaris, 46                     Advance directive, 125                 Angina, unstable, 4, 5
Acromegaly, 72–73, 222                Aggregatibacter aphrophilus, 214       Angioﬁbromas, 68
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomi-     AIDS, 53, 57                           Angioplasty, 36
       tans, 214                      Akathisia, 427                           percutaneous, 25
Acute appendicitis, 496–497           Alagille syndrome, 395                 Angiotensin receptor blockers, 15,
Acute cardiogenic pulmonary           Alcohol withdrawal syndrome, 404,             20
       edema, 3                                502                           Animal bite, 498
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS),          atrial ﬁbrillation secondary to,     Anion gap acidosis, 460
       4–5                                     502                           Ankle-brachial index (ABI), 36
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP),   Alcoholic cardiomyopathy, 18–19        Ankylosing spondylitis (AS), 220–
       192                            Alcoholism, 404                               221
Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN),   Aldosterone deﬁciency, 76              Anorexia nervosa, 405
       461                            Aldosterone inhibitor, 8               Anthrax, 104
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 462–       Allis’s sign, 368                      Anticentromere antibodies, 236
       463, 464                       α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency, 148, 441,    Antidepressants, 265
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia                   442                           Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 7
       (ALL), 166                     α-blockers, 23                         Anti-double-stranded DNA
Acute mesenteric ischemia (AMI),      α-fetoprotein (AFP), 320, 387                 (dsDNA), 241
       58                             α-thalassemia, 188–189                 Antiepileptics, 265, 309
Acute myelogenous leukemia            Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 252            during pregnancy, 309
       (AML), 164–165                 Amenorrhea                             Anti–glomerular basement mem-
Acute otitis media (AOM), 388           primary, 328–329                            brane (anti-GBM) antibody,
Acute renal failure, 8, 34, 205,        major causes of, 329                        472, 473
       466–467. See also Acute          secondary, 330                       Antineutrophil cytoplasmic anti-
       kidney injury                  Amniocentesis, 320                            body (c-ANCA), 456, 472

                                                                                                          533
Antinuclear antibody (ANA), 236,       Atrioventricular nodal reentrant          Boutonnière deformities, 234
        241, 472                               tachycardia, 512–513              Brain abscess, 214, 255
Antithrombin III deﬁciency, 16         Atrioventricular reciprocating            Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP),
Antiplatelet therapy, 8                        tachycardia (AVRT), 40–41                 14, 15
Antiphospholipid antibody syn-         Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity dis-       Breast cancer, 106–107, 331
        drome, 16                              order (ADHD), 406                 Breast-feeding, 294
Anti-Smith antibodies, 241             Atypical pneumonia, 440                     jaundice associated with, 389
Antitopoisomerase I (anti-scl-70),     Autism, 407                                 mastitis in, 306
        236                            Autosomal dominant polycystic             Bronchiolitis, 392
Aortic aneurysm, 6                             kidney disease (ADPKD),           Brucella, 104
Aortic coarctation, 6, 24, 489                 484–485                           Brudzinski’s sign, 385
Aortic dissection, 6–7, 34             Autosomal recessive polycystic kid-       Bulimia nervosa, 405, 408–409
Aortic regurgitation, 9, 20, 352               ney disease (ARPKD), 485          Bullous pemphigoid, 50
Aortic root aneurysms, 352                                                         differentiation of pemphigus
Aortic stenosis (AS), 21, 33                                                             from, 59
                                       B
Aortic valve replacement, 6                                                      “Bull’s-eye” rash, 202
Aortoiliac occlusion (Leriche’s syn-   Bacillus species, 209                     Burkholderia cepacia, 362
        drome), 36                     Bacterial vaginosis (BV), 332–333         Burns, thermal, 500–501
Aortitis, 352                          Bacteroides species, 323, 332, 348
Aphakia, 510                           “Bamboo spine,” 221
                                                                                 C
Appendicitis, acute, 496–497           Barlow maneuver, 368
Areﬂexia, 263                          Basal cell carcinoma, 48–49               Calcium channel blockers, 11, 20,
Argyll Robertson pupil, 290, 352       Becker’s sign, 9                                  37, 38, 265
Arthritis, 146, 367                    Beck’s sign, 12                           Calymmatobacterium granuloma-
  gouty, 228                           Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome,                      tis, 337
  oligoarticular, 62                           399                               Cameron’s lesions, 145
  osteoarthritis, 114, 244             Bell’s palsy, 203                         Campylobacter jejuni, 263
  rheumatoid, 6, 222, 230, 234–        Benign positional paroxysmal ver-         Cancer screening measures, rec-
        235, 444, 449, 452                     tigo (BPPV), 269                          ommended, 109
     juvenile (JRA), 230               Beriberi, wet, 19                         Candida albicans, 357, 362
  septic, 216, 498                     β-blockers, 2, 5, 7, 8, 11, 19, 20, 23,   Candida species, 209, 323, 357
Asbestosis, 444                                26, 31, 37, 38, 265               Candidiasis, vulvovaginal, 357
Ascaris lumbricoides, 382              Bias, 102, 108                            Capital femoral epiphysis, 231,
Asherman’s syndrome, 330               Bicuspid aortic valve, 6                          242–243
Asperger’s disorder, 407               Bilevel positive airway pressure            avascular necrosis of, 231
Aspergillus species, 209, 362                  (BiPAP), 441                        slipped, 242–243
Associations, 103                      Bilirubin, increased production of,       Caput medusae, 148
Asthma, 438–439                                389                               Carbon monoxide poisoning, 503
  classiﬁcation, diagnosis, and        Binge eating disorder, 405                Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA),
        management of, 439             Bioterrorism, 104–105                             136
Atheroembolism, 8                      Bipolar disorder, 423                     Carcinoid syndrome, 135
Atherosclerosis, 2, 25, 36, 504, 518   Bites, human and animal, 498              Cardiac arrest, 504
Atopic dermatitis, 47                    comparison of human, dog, and           Cardiac catheterization, 6
Atrial ﬁbrillation (AF), 10–11, 20,            cat bites, 499                    Cardiac ﬁbrosis, 225
        37, 278, 502                   Blood pressure values, recommen-          Cardiac murmur, 32–33
  ECG characteristic of, 10                    dations for, 109                    major characteristics, 33
  secondary to alcohol withdrawal      Body dysmorphic disorder, 416             Cardiac tamponade, 12–13, 35
        syndrome, 502                  Body mass index (BMI), 114–115            Cardiobacterium hominis, 214
Atrial septal defect, 395              Boerhaave’s syndrome, 408                 Cardiomyopathy, 18–19, 26–27,
Atrioventricular block, second-        Borderline personality disorder, 42               33, 225, 504
        degree (Mobitz type II),       Borrelia burgdorferi, 202–203               alcoholic, 18–19
        38–39                          Botulism, 104, 436                          dilated, 504

534
  hypertrophic obstructive              Cirrhosis, liver, 148–149, 485        CREST syndrome, 237
       (HOCM), 26–27, 33, 504           Civatte bodies, 55                    Crohn’s disease (CD), 146–147,
Carditis, 203                           Claudication, 36, 238–239, 245                366–367
Carotid stenosis, 278                     arm, 245                            Croup (laryngotracheobronchitis),
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS),             intermittent, 36                            370
       72, 222                            neurogenic, 238–239                 Cullen sign, 132
Case-control study, 102–103, 108        Closed-angle glaucoma, 258            Cushing’s disease, 22, 74, 75, 87
Cauda equina syndrome, 239              Clostridium difﬁcile, 146, 153, 505   Cushing’s syndrome, 24, 45, 74–
Causal relationships, 103               Clostridium perfringens, 208                  75, 87, 364, 489
Cavernous venous thrombosis, 255        Coagulation cascade, 295                obesity and, 114
Celiac disease, 138                     Coal miner’s disease, 444             Cushing’s triad, 256
Cellulitis, 255, 498                    Cocaine dependence, 410–411           Cyclothymia, 423
Cerebral atrophy, 267                   Codman’s triangle, 233                Cystic ﬁbrosis, 376, 382, 450
Cerebral hemorrhage, 214                Cohort studies, 108                   Cystitis, 218
Cerebral infarction, “insular rib-      Collagen vascular disease, 34         Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 157,
       bon sign” in, 279, 280           Compartment syndrome, 223                     201, 325, 365
Cerebritis, 214                         Colon cancer, 136–137
Cervical carcinoma, 334–335             Condoms, 293
                                                                              D
  precancerous lesions, diagnostic      Conduct disorder, 41
       screening of, 335                Condyloma acuminata (genital          Dawn phenomenon, 78
Cervicitis, 347                                 warts), 344                   De Quervain’s thyroiditis, 100
Chagas’ disease, 134                    Condyloma lata, 352                   DeBakey classiﬁcation, 6
Chancroid, 336–337                      Conﬁdentiality, 124, 127              Decision-making capacity, 126
  genital ulcerative lesions, differ-   Confounding, 102                      Deep venous thrombosis (DVT),
       ential diagnosis of, 337         Congenital infections, 365                   16–17, 170, 217, 294, 447,
Chickenpox, 396                         Congenital adrenal hyperplasia               505
Child abuse, 360–361                            (CAH), 364                      thrombophlebitis due to, 217
Chlamydia trachomatis, 197, 198,        Congenital heart disease, 394         Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
       199, 337, 347, 348               Congestive heart failure (CHF),              (DHEAS), 350
  L1–L3, 337                                    14–15, 23, 29, 142, 449       Delirium, 413
Chlamydophila pneumoniae, 197,            guidelines for classiﬁcation and    Delirium tremens (DTs), 404
       440                                      treatment of, 15              Dementia, 252–253, 266
Chlamydophila psittaci, 197               stages of, 15                         frontotemporal (FTD), 251
Cholecystitis, acute, 130–131             in transudative pleural effusion,   deMusset’s sign, 9
  cholecystectomy, 131                          449                           Denys-Drash syndrome, 399
  percutaneous cholecystotomy,          Conjunctivitis, neonatal (ophthal-    Depression, major, 418–419
       131                                      mia neonatorum), 197          Dermatitis, atopic, 47
Cholesterol levels, recommended,        Conn’s syndrome, 82, 489              Dermatomyositis (DM), 224
       109                              Consumptive coagulopathy, 295         Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Chorioamnionitis, 322                   Continuous positive airway pres-             (DDH), 368–369
Choriocarcinoma, 302                            sure (CPAP), 458              Developmental milestones, 371
Chorionic villus sampling, 320          Contraception, 293                    Dexamethasone challenge, 75
Chorioretinitis, 362                    Conversion disorder, 416              Diabetes insipidus (DI), 77
Chronic granulomatous disease           Coronary artery disease, 3, 20, 22,   Diabetes mellitus, 20, 22, 36, 45,
       (CGD), 362–363                           25, 504                              72, 78, 114, 222, 278, 483,
Chronic kidney disease, 468–469         Coronary artery bypass grafting, 6           487, 504
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia            Cortisol deﬁciency, 76                  gestational, 300–301
       (CLL), 168–169                   Corynebacterium jeikeium, 209           pregestational, 301
Chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-      Couvelaire uterus, 310                  type 1, 78
       ease (COPD), 441, 442,           Coxsackievirus, 157                   Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 79,
       450                              Crack cocaine use, 6                         479
Chylothorax, 449                        Cranial nerve palsies, 203            Diastolic dysfunction, 3, 20

                                                                                                            535
DiGeorge syndrome, 395                End-of-life decisions, 125             Factor VIII, 175, 194, 295
Digital rectal examination, 109       Endocarditis, infective (IE), 28–29,   Failure to thrive (FTT), 376
Disease prevalence, 110                       214                            Fanconi’s anemia (FA), 171
Disseminated gonococcal infection       subacute, 214                        Fasciotomy, 223
        (DGI), 198–199                Endometrial hyperplasia, 351           Fecal occult blood test, 109
Disseminated intravascular coagu-     Endometriosis, 304, 340–341            Fetal monitoring, 298–299
        lation (DIC), 295, 434          frequent sites of deposits in, 341   Fibrocystic breast disease, 338–
Dissociative fugue, 414               Endometritis, 314–315                          339
Diuretics, 20, 22, 37                 Endoscopic retrograde cholang-         Fibromuscular dysplasia, 25
  loop, 3, 482                                iopancreatography (ERCP),      Fibromyalgia, 229
  potassium-sparing, 83                       131, 132                       Fibrous dysplasia, 232
  potassium-wasting, 487              End-stage renal disease (ESRD),        Fifth disease, 397
  thiazide, 23, 96, 228, 482                  484                            FIGO staging system, 334
Diverticulitis, 139                   Enterocolitis, 381                     Fine-needle aspiration (FNA),
Dix-Hallpike maneuver, 269            Enterococcus, 156                              118–119, 338
Domestic violence, 415, 517           Enzyme-linked immunosorbent as-        Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome, 349
“Double bubble” sign, 374                     say (ELISA), 202               Flexible sigmoidoscopy, 109
Down syndrome, 372–373, 375,          Epidemiological classiﬁcation, 113     Fluorescent treponemal antibody
        380                           Epidural abscess, 254–255                      absorption test (FTA-ABS),
Dressler’s syndrome, 34               Epidural hematoma (EDH), 256–                  290, 352
Drowning, 506–507                             257                            Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
DTaP (diphtheria/tetanus/pertussis)   Epiglottitis, 370                              (FSGS), 483
        vaccine, 371                  Epilepsy, 289                          Focused abdominal sonogram for
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy         Episcleritis, 146                              trauma (FAST), 12
        (DMD), 225                    Epistaxis, 190                         Folic acid, 309
Duke criteria, 28                     Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 157, 176,    Follicle-stimulating hormone
Duodenal atresia, 374–375                     201                                    (FSH), 328, 345, 350
Dupuytren’s contractures, 148         Erectile dysfunction, 470–471          Frontotemporal dementia (FTD),
Duroziez’s sign, 9                    Erythema migrans, 202                          251
Dyslipidemia, 22, 114, 278, 504       Erythema multiforme, 65
Dysphagia, 134, 140                   Erythema nodosum, 146, 367
                                                                             G
Dystonia, acute, 427                  Escherichia coli, 156, 191, 216,
                                              218, 323, 348, 385             Galeazzi’s sign, 368
                                      Esophageal carcinoma, 140              Gardner’s disease, 136
E
                                      Esophageal rupture, 449                Gardnerella vaginalis, 323, 332
Early decelerations, 298              Ethics and legal issues, 123–127       Gaskin all-fours maneuver, 319
Eating disorders, 405                   advance directive, 125               Gastrinoma, 162
Ectopic pregnancy, 296–297, 349         conﬁdentiality, 124                  Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
Eczema, 47                              decision-making capacity, 126               (GERD), 114, 141
Edrophonium test, 275                   end-of-life decisions, 125           Gastrointestinal bleeding, in
Edwards’ syndrome (trisomy 18),         euthanasia, 125                             infants, 382
       373, 387                         life-sustaining interventions, 125   Gastroschisis, 387
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 6               palliative care, 125                 Generalized anxiety disorder
Eikenella corrodens, 214                physician-assisted suicide (PAS),           (GAD), 417
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT),              125                            Genital ulcerative lesions, differen-
       418–419                        Euthanasia, 125                               tial diagnosis of, 337
Emancipated minor, 127                Euvolemia, 96                          Genital warts (condyloma acumi-
Emphysema, 441, 442, 452                                                            nata), 344
Empyema, 449                                                                 Gerhard’s sign, 9
                                      F
Encephalitis, 214, 276                                                       Gestational diabetes, 300–301
Encephalopathy, anoxic, 504           Factor V Leiden, 16, 170               Giant cell arteritis, 6, 246
Enchondromatosis, 232                   mutation, 170                        Glasgow Coma Scale, 506

536
Glaucoma, 258–259                  Hemochromatosis, 20, 142–143,         Huntington’s disease, 266
  closed-angle, 258                         148                          Hydatidiform mole, 30
  open-angle, 259                  Hemoglobin H disease, 188–189         Hydronephrosis, 218, 466
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM),     Hemoglobinuria, 507                   Hydrops fetalis, 305
        260–261                    Hemolytic uremic syndrome,            21-Hydroxylase deﬁciency, 364
Glioneural hamartomas, 68                   thrombotic thrombocy-        Hyperaldosteronism, 24, 82–83,
Glomerulonephritis (GN), 214,               topenic purpura with (TTP-           489
        456, 461, 462, 472–473              HUS), 191                    Hypercalcemia, 84, 132, 443, 453,
  pauci-immune, 473                Hemophilia, 175                               474–475
  rapidly progressive, 472–473     Hemothorax, 449                         cancer-associated mechanisms
     distinguishing feature of     Henderson-Paterson bodies, 56,                of, 475
        common causes of, 473               57                             local osteolytic, 475
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydroge-     Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP),         of malignancy, 474–475
        nase (G6PD) deﬁciency,              378–379, 382                 Hypercarbia, 436–437
        172–173                    Hepatic necrosis, fulminant, 201      Hypercholesterolemia, 22
Gonioscopy, 258                    Hepatic failure, 72                   Hypercortisolism, 75
Gonococcal infection, dissemi-     Hepatic primary sclerosing cholan-    Hyperglycemia, 79, 88, 479
        nated (DGI), 198–199                gitis, 367                     fasting, 88
Goodpasture’s syndrome, 472        Hepatitis, viral, 55, 157–159           hyperosmolar hyperglycemic
Gottron’s papules, 224               clinical and laboratory features            state (HHS), 479
Gout, 114, 228                              of, 158                      Hyperhomocysteinemia, 16
Gouty arthritis, 228                 common serologic patterns in        Hyperkalemia, 76, 166, 462, 476–
Gower’s sign, 225                           hepatitis B, 159                     477, 487
Granulocytopenia, 196                hepatitis C, 55                       ECG manifestations of, 476,
Graves’ disease, 52, 80–81         Hepatobiliary disease, 114                    477
  severe ophthalmopathy associ-    Hereditary multiple exostoses,        Hypernatremia, 478
        ated with, 81                       232                          Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state
Grey Turner sign, 132              Hereditary nonpolyposis colon                 (HHS), 479
Group B streptococci, 323, 385              cancer (HNPCC), 136          Hyperparathyroidism, 84, 87, 90
Growth hormone (GH), hyperse-      Herniated disk, 226–227                 ectopic, 475
                                   Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 51,         primary, 84, 90, 475
        cretion of, 72–73
                                            157, 325, 347, 365           Hyperphosphatemia, 166, 462
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS),
                                   Herpes zoster, 66–67                  Hyperprolactinemia, 329
        262–263, 436
                                   Hiatal hernia, 144–145                Hypertension, 2, 3, 6, 20, 36, 109,
Gynecomastia, 443
                                   Hidradenitis suppurativa, 52                  114, 245, 278, 468–469,
                                   High-grade squamous intraepithe-              504
H                                           lial lesion (HSIL), 335        poorly controlled, 468–469
                                   Hill’s sign, 9                          in pregnancy, 303
HACEK organisms, 214               Hirschsprung disease, 380–381           primary (essential), 23
Haemophilus aphrophilus, 214       Histoplasmosis, 200                     renovascular, 83, 488–489
Haemophilus ducreyi, 336           HIV, 53, 57, 201, 452                   secondary, 24, 488–489
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, 180, 254,   Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 176–177,               major causes of, 489
       348, 385, 388                        475                          Hyperthyroidism, 11, 80–81, 470
  type B vaccine, 271, 370         Hormone replacement therapy           Hypertriglyceridemia, 88, 132
HAIR-AN syndrome, 45                        (HRT), 16, 345, 351          Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomy-
Hairy cell leukemia, 174           Horner’s syndrome, 443                        opathy (HOCM), 26–27,
Hantavirus, 104                    Howell-Jolly bodies, 187                      33
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 52, 85    Human herpesvirus 8, 53, 61, 397      Hyperuricemia, 115, 166, 196,
Health care screening, 109         Human leukocyte antigen-B27                   462
Heinz bodies, 173                           (HLA-B27), 220               Hypoalbuminemia, 148, 480, 483
Helicobacter pylori, 151, 162      Human papillomavirus (HPV),           Hypocalcemia, 166, 276, 480–481
HELLP syndrome, 317                         334, 344, 347                Hypochondriasis, 416

                                                                                                       537
Hypoﬁbrinogenemia, 295                Irritable bowel syndrome, 150              chronic lymphocytic (CLL),
Hypogammaglobulinemia, 483            IUD (intrauterine device), 293, 355              168–169
Hypoglycemia, 276, 413                                                           hairy cell, 174
Hypokalemia, 19, 31, 82–83, 115                                                Lewy bodies, 281
                                      J
  electrocardiographic manifesta-                                              Lhermitte’s phenomenon, 272
       tion of, 82                    Janeway lesions, 28, 214                 Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 232
  weight loss and, 115                Jaundice, breast-feeding, 389            Lichen planus, 54–55
Hypomagnesemia, 19, 31                Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA),     Light’s criteria, 449
Hyponatremia, 76, 96–97, 215,                 230                              Lipemia retinalis, 22
       276, 413                                                                Listeria monocytogenes, 322
  euvolemic, 96                                                                Liver, cirrhosis of, 148–149
                                      K
Hypotension, 8, 26, 76, 450, 462                                               Looser’s lines, 480
Hypothalamic obesity, 114             Kallmann’s syndrome, 328, 329            Low-grade squamous intraepithe-
Hypothermia, 11                       Kaposi sarcoma (KS), 53                          lial lesion (LSIL), 335
Hypothesis testing, errors in, 116    Kawasaki disease, 84                     Lumbar puncture (LP), 385
Hypothyroidism, 22, 100, 222, 329,    Kayser-Fleischer rings, 160              Lung cancer, 443
       470, 489                       Keratitis, 67                            Luteinizing hormone (LH), 350
Hypovolemia, 464                      Kernicterus, 389                         Lyme disease, 202–203
Hypoxemia, 3, 436                     Kernig’s sign, 270, 385                  Lymphomas, vitamin D–secreting,
Hypsarrhythmia, 267                   Ketonemia, 79                                    475
                                      Kidney disease                           Lynch II syndrome, 346
                                        autosomal dominant polycystic
I
                                              (ADPKD), 484–485
                                                                               M
Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis            autosomal recessive polycystic
         (IPF), 444–445                       (ARPKD), 485                     Magnesium deﬁciency, 480
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic pur-        chronic, 23, 468–469, 484              Major depression, 418–419
         pura (ITP), 182              Kingella kingae, 209, 214                Malabsorption, 283, 376, 480
Impotence. See Erectile dysfunction   Klebsiella pneumoniae, 156               Malaria, 204–205
Incidence, 110–111                    Klinefelter’s syndrome, 470              Malingering, 416
   cumulative, 110                    Korsakoff’s syndrome, 404, 522           Mammography, 106–107, 109
   rate, 111                          Kussmaul’s sign, 12                      Marfan’s syndrome, 6, 9
Incontinence, urinary, 356                                                     Mastitis, 306
Infantile spasms (West syndrome),                                              Mayne’s sign, 9
                                      L
         267                                                                   McDonald criteria for diagnosing
Infective endocarditis (IE), 28–29    Labor, normal, 307                               multiple sclerosis, 273,
Inﬂammatory bowel disease, 16,        Lactic acidosis, 196                             274
         146–147                      Lambert-Eaton syndrome, 443              McRoberts maneuver, 319
Inﬂuenza vaccine, 112–113             Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup),        Meckel’s diverticulum, 382
Informed consent, 116                         370                              Meconium aspiration syndrome
Insulin resistance, 114               Legal issues. See Ethics and legal is-           (MAS), 318–319
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-            sues                             Melanoma, 70
         1), 72                       Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease               Membranous nephropathy (MBN),
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia                  (LCPD), 231                              483
         (INO), 268                   Legionella pneumoniae, 440               Ménière’s disease, 269
Inter-rater reliability, 119          Lentigo maligna, 70                      Meningitis, 67, 203, 214, 270–271,
Interstitial lung disease (ILD),      Leptin deﬁciency, 114                            276, 385, 498
         444–445, 453                 Leriche’s syndrome (aortoiliac oc-        bacterial, 270–271, 385
Intimate partner violence (IPV),              clusion), 36                     Menstruation, retrograde, 304
         415                          Leukemia                                 Mesothelioma, 446
Intrinsic factor, 282                   acute lymphoblastic (ALL), 166         Metabolic acidosis, 79, 468, 487,
Intussusception, 382–383                acute myelogenous (AML), 164–                  506
Iron-deﬁciency anemia, 178–179                165                               anion gap, 468, 479

538
Metabolic alkalosis, 390, 460          papillary muscle rupture follow-      Open-angle glaucoma, 259
 hypochloremic, 390                         ing, 32                          Ophthalmia neonatorum, 197
Metabolic syndrome, 88                 ST-elevation (STEMI), 4–5, 8          Ophthalmoplegia, 263, 268, 272
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-    Myocardial ischemia, 4–5                 internuclear (INO), 268, 272
        cus aureus (MRSA), 206–       Myoglobin, 462                         Opiate overdose, 436–437
        207, 208                      Myoglobinuria, 507                     Opioid withdrawal, 422
Microcephaly, 267                     Myopia, 510                            Optic neuritis, 272
Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA),                                              Oral contraceptives (OCPs), 489
        472                                                                  Orbital cellulitis, 255
                                      N
Migraine with aura, 264–265                                                  Orbital fracture, 517
Minimal change disease (MCD),         Neck trauma, penetrating, 520–         Organophosphate poisoning, acute,
        483                                   521                                    508–509
Mitral prolapse, 33                     zones of the neck, 521               Ortolani maneuver, 368
Mitral regurgitation (MR), 20, 33,    Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC),       Osler’s nodes, 28, 214
        37                                    386                            Osteoarthritis, 114, 244
Mitral stenosis, 33                   Necrotizing fasciitis, 208             Osteomalacia (vitamin D deﬁ-
MMR (measles/mumps/rubella)           Negative predictive value (NPV),               ciency), 90–91, 480
        vaccine, 324, 371                     121                            Osteomyelitis, 214
Mobiluncus species, 332               Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 197, 198–         acute, 210–211
Mohs’ micrographic surgery, 49                199, 216, 347, 348               of the frontal bone (Pott’s puffy
Molluscum contagiosum, 56–57          Neisseria meningitidis, 270, 385               tumor), 255
Mononucleosis, infectious, 201        Nephritis, acute interstitial (AIN),   Osteopenia, 90
Monro’s microabscesses, 63                    461                            Osteoporosis, 90–91, 180
Moraxella, 254                        Nephroblastoma, 399                    Osteosarcoma, 232–233
Moraxella catarrhalis, 388            Nephrolithiasis, 218, 482              Otitis media, acute (AOM), 388
Mueller’s sign, 9                     Nephropathy, radiocontrast, 8          Ovarian cancer, 346
Multiple endocrine neoplasia          Nephrotic syndrome, 16, 22, 449,       Oxytocin, 316
 type 1 (MEN1), 86–87, 162                    483
 type 2a (MEN2a), 89, 162             Neural tube defects, 309
                                                                             P
Multiple myeloma (MM), 90, 180,       Neuroblastoma, 399
        475                           Neurogenic claudication, 238–          Pacemaker, 39
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 268, 272–            239                            Paget’s disease of bone, 91, 92–93,
        274                           Neutropenic fever, 183, 209                    232
 McDonald criteria for diagnos-       Nikolsky’s sign, 58, 59                  bone scan of, 93
        ing, 273, 274                 Nipah virus, 104                         early and late radiographs of, 93
Munchausen’s syndrome, 416            Nocardia species, 362                  Pain disorder, 416
Murphy’s sign, 130                    Nonaccidental trauma, 360              Palliative care, 125
Muscular dystrophy, Duchenne’s        Non–small cell lung cancer             Pancreatitis, acute, 132–133, 460
        (DMD), 225                            (NSCLC), 443                     Ranson’s criteria for predicting
Myasthenia gravis (MG), 275, 436      Nystagmus, 269                                 mortality risk in, 133
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 454                                              PANDAS (pediatric autoimmune
Mycoplasma, 348                                                                      neuropsychiatric disorders
                                      O
Mycoplasma hominis, 332                                                              associated with streptococ-
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 64, 440        Obesity, 114–115, 504                          cal infections), 430
Myocardial infarction (MI), 4–5, 8,   Obsessive-compulsive disorder          Panic attacks, 417
        23, 30–33, 34                        (OCD), 425, 430                 Panton-Valentine leukocidin, 207
 acute anterior wall, 30–31           Obsessive-compulsive personality       Pap smear, 109, 334
 diagnosis and management of                 disorder (OCPD), 425            Papillary muscle rupture, 32
        mechanical complications      Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA),         Paraganglioma, 95
        in, 31                               452, 458                        Parainﬂuenza virus, 370
 non-ST-elevation (NSTEMI),           Omphalocele, 387                       Parakeratosis, 63
        4–5, 8                        Onychomycosis (OM), 69                 Paramyxovirus, 397

                                                                                                            539
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), ex-        Pituitary insufﬁciency, 326           Posttraumatic stress disorder
         cess secretion of, 84        Pityriasis rosea, 60–61                       (PTSD), 428
Parathyroid hormone–related pro-      Placebo effect, 116                   Pott’s puffy tumor, 255
         tein (PTHrP)–secreting tu-   Placenta previa, 311, 313             Prader-Willi syndrome, 114
         mors, 475                    Placental abruption, 310–311, 313     Precordial auscultation, sites of, 32
Parkinsonism, 266, 281, 427           Placental “migration,” 313            Predictive value, 121
Parkinson’s disease, 281              Plasmodium species, 204               Preeclampsia-eclampsia, 317
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobin-      Pleural effusion, 448–449             Pregnancy
         uria, 16                     Pneumoconioses, 444                     ectopic, 296–297
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachy-    Pneumocystis jiroveci, 212              normal physiology of, 308
         cardia (PSVT), 512–513          pneumonia (PCP), 212, 213,           nutrition in, 309
Parvovirus B19, 397                           450                           Prenatal screening, 320
Patau’s syndrome (trisomy 13),              ground-glass appearance on      Prerenal disease, 461, 464–465
         373                                  chest raiography in, 213        distinguishing ATI from, 465
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 33    Pneumocystosis, 212–213               Preseptal cellulitis, 255
Pavlik harness, 369                   Pneumonia, 212, 213, 434, 440,        Preterm labor (PTL), 321
Pelvic fracture, 519                          449                           Preterm premature rupture of
Pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID),        atypical, 440                              membranes (PPROM), 322
         348–349                         community-acquired, 440            Preventative health measures, clas-
Pemphigus, 58–59                         Pneumocystis jiroveci (PCP),               siﬁcation of, 113
   differentiation from bullous               212, 213, 450                 Primary sclerosing cholangitis
         pemphigus, 59                   usual interstitial (UIP), 445              (PSC), 152, 367
Penetrating abdominal trauma, 524     Pneumothorax, 450–451                 Primary survey, 519, 524
Penetrating neck trauma, 520–521      Pneumovax, 271                        Prolactin, 350
Peptic ulcer disease (PUD), 151,      Polycystic kidney disease, 77, 484–   Prolactinoma, 470
         162                                  485                           Propionibacterium acnes, 46
Peptostreptococcus, 332                  autosomal dominant (ADPKD),        Prospective cohort study, 108
Pericardiocentesis, 13, 34                    484–485                       Protein C and S deﬁciency, 16
Pericarditis, 20, 34–35, 214             autosomal recessive (ARPKD),       Proteus, 323
   acute, 34–35                               485                           Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs),
   constrictive, 20                   Polycystic ovarian syndrome                   141, 308
Perimenopause, 345                            (PCOS), 330, 350, 351         Pseudomembranous colitis, 153
Perineal laceration, 312                 obesity and, 114                   Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 209, 216,
Perinuclear antineutrophil cyto-      Polycythemia vera, 184–185                    500
         plasmic antibody             Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR),         Psittacosis, 197
         (p-ANCA), 456                        247                           Psoriasis, 62–63
Peripheral vascular disease (PVD),    Porphyrias, 192                       Pulmonary arterial hypertension
         23, 25, 36, 470              Portal hypertension, 485                      (PAH), 452
Peritonitis, spontaneous bacterial    Positive end-expiratory pressure      Pulmonary edema, 3, 14, 503, 507
         (SBP), 156                           (PEEP), 435                     acute cardiogenic, 3
Pervasive developmental disorders     Positive predictive value (PPV),      Pulmonary embolism (PE), 11,
         (PDDs), 407                          120                                   217, 447, 449
Peyronie’s disease, 470               Posterior vitreous detachment         Pulmonary ﬁbrosis, idiopathic
Phalen maneuver, 222                          (PVD), 510                            (IPF), 444–445, 452
Phenylketonuria (PKU), 267            Postherpetic neuralgia, 66, 67        Pulmonic stenosis, 33, 394
Pheochromocytoma (PCC), 24,           Postictal state, 288                    subvalvular, 394
         94–95, 489                   Postpartum hemorrhage, 316            Pulsus paradoxus, 34
Phimosis, 470                         Postpartum infection, 314             Puriﬁed protein derivative (PPD),
Physical abuse, 415, 517              Postpartum pituitary necrosis                 455
Physician-assisted suicide (PAS),             (Sheehan’s syndrome),         Pyelonephritis, 218, 321, 323
         125                                  326                           Pyloric stenosis, 390
Pituitary adenomas, 87                Post-thrombotic syndrome, 217         Pyoderma gangrenosum, 146

540
Q                                     Right ventricular hypertrophy,        Sinusitis, 254–255, 456
                                              394                              chronic, 456
Quincke’s pulses, 9
                                      Robertsonian translocation, 372       Sjögren’s disease, 444
                                      Rocky Mountain spotted fever          “Slapped cheek” rash, 397
R                                             (RMSF), 215                   Sleep apnea, obstructive (OSA),
                                      Rosenbach’s sign, 9                           452, 458
Rabies, 498
                                      Roseola, 397                          Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Radiocontrast nephropathy, 8
                                      Rothmund-Thomson syndrome,                    (SCFE), 242–243
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, 67
                                              232                           Small bowel obstruction, 154–
Randomized clinical trial (RCT),
                                      Roth’s spots, 28, 214                         155
        116–117
Ranson’s criteria, 133                Rotterdam criteria, 350               Small cell lung cancer (SCLC),
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR), 290,       Rubella, 324, 325, 365, 397                   443
        352                             congenital, 324, 325, 365           Smallpox, 104–105
Rapidly progressive glomerulone-      Rubeola, 397                          Social phobia, 417
        phritis (RPGN), 472–473       Rubin II maneuver, 319                Somatization disorder, 416, 429
  distinguishing features of com-     “Rule of Nines” to estimate per-      Somatoform disorders, 416
        mon causes of, 473                    centage of burns, 500, 501    Speciﬁcity, 118–119
Raynaud’s phenomenon, 237, 245                                              Spinal stenosis, 238–239
Reed-Sternberg cells, 176–177                                               Splenic rupture, 201
                                      S
Refeeding syndrome, 405                                                     Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Reliability, 120                      Salmonella, 210                               (SBP), 156
Renal artery stenosis, 24–25, 489     Sandhoff disease, 393                 Stanford classiﬁcation, 6
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC), 486       Sarcoidosis, 20, 222, 453             Staphylococcus species, 362
Renal failure, 23, 72                 Schizoaffective disorder, 426         Staphylococcus aureus, 29, 209,
  acute, 8, 34                        Schizoid personality disorder, 420–           210, 211, 216, 218, 306,
Renal infarction, 214                         421                                   353, 362
Renal insufﬁciency, 228               Schizophrenia, 426–427                   methicillin-resistant (MRSA),
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA), 376,    Schizophreniform disorder, 426                206–207, 208
        487                           Schizotypal personality disorder,     Staphylococcus epidermidis, 216
Renovascular hypertension, 488–               420–421                       Statins, 8, 22
        489                           Sclerodactyly, 237                    Steatohepatitis, nonalcoholic,
Reperfusion injury (RI), 8            Scleroderma, 236–237, 444, 452                148
Respiratory alkalosis, 447            Secondary survey, 519                 Stenotrophomonas species, 209
Respiratory distress syndrome         Seizures, 214, 276–277, 377, 503      Stent, 8
        (RDS), 391                       febrile, 377                          bare metal (BMS), 8
Respiratory failure, acute, 436–437      generalized tonic-clonic              drug-eluting (DES), 8
Respiratory syncytial virus, 370,             (GTCS), 288–289               Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS),
        391                              partial complex, 276–277                   64–65, 347
Retinal detachment, 510–511           Sensitivity, 118–119                  Streptococcus
Retinopathy, 23, 78                   Sepsis, 434, 498, 514                    group A β-hemolytic, 430
Retrospective cohort study, 108       Septic arthritis, 216, 498               group B, 323, 385
Rett’s disorder, 407                  Serratia marcescens, 362              Streptococcus pneumoniae, 156,
Reverse Woods screw, 319              Sexually transmitted infections,              180, 210, 254, 270, 385,
Rhabdomyolysis, postictal, 462                323                                   388
Rhabdomyoma, cardiac, 68              Shagreen patch, 68                       meningitis caused by, 270, 385
Rheumatic fever, 34                   Sheehan’s syndrome (postpartum        Streptococcus viridans, 146, 214
Rheumatoid arthritis, 6, 222, 230,            pituitary necrosis), 326      Stroke, 23, 114, 278–280
        234–235, 444, 449, 452        Shigella, 191                            acute ischemic, 278–280
  juvenile (JRA), 230                 Shingles, 66–67                          brain stem, 268
Richter’s syndrome, 168               Sickle cell anemia, 16, 186–187          embolic, 214
Ricin toxin, 104                         osteomyelitis in, 210              Subacute combined degeneration,
Rickettsia rickettsii, 215            Silicosis, 444                                282–283

                                                                                                         541
Subacute granulomatous thyroiditis     Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarc-    Turner’s syndrome, 6, 328
        (SGT), 100                             tion (TIMI) risk score, 5     Tzanck smear, 67
Subacute infective endocarditis,       Thrombophilia, hereditary, 16
        214                            Thrombophlebitis, 217
                                                                             U
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH),         Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
        284–285                                purpura with hemolytic        Ulcerative colitis (UC), 146–147
Subdural hematoma (SDH), 286–                  uremic syndrome (TTP-         Ulnar deviation, 234, 235
        287                                    HUS), 191                     Unstable angina, 4, 5
Substance abuse, 426                   Thyroid nodule, 98–99                 Urethral injury, traumatic, 491
Subvalvular pulmonic stenosis, 394     Thyroid-stimulating hormone           Urinary incontinence, 356
Sudden cardiac death (SCD), 26,                (TSH), 85, 98, 350            Urinary tract infection (UTI), 218,
        504                            Thyroiditis, subacute granuloma-              461, 484
Suicide, 432                                   tous (de Quervain’s), 100     Usual interstitial pneumonia
Swan-neck deformities, 234, 235        Thyrotoxicosis, 11                            (UIP), 445
Syncope, 26, 38, 40, 503, 515          Thyroxine (T4), 100                   Uterine atony, 316
Syndrome of inappropriate anti-        Tinel sign, 222                       Uterine leiomyomata, 342–343
        diuretic hormone secretion     TORCH infections, 324, 325            Uterine rupture, 311
        (SIADH), 96–97                    overview of, 325                   Uveitis, 67, 146, 258, 367
Synovitis, 235                         ToRCHeS infections, 365
Syphilis, 290, 325, 352, 365           Tourette’s disorder, 430–431
                                                                             V
  primary, 352                         Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 65
  secondary, 352                       Toxic megacolon, 153                  Vaccinia immune globulin, 104
  tertiary, 290, 352                   Toxic shock syndrome (TSS), 353       Vaginal infections, 323
Syphilitic aortitis, 6                 Toxoplasmosis, 324, 325, 365          Vaginitis, trichomonal, 354–355
Systemic lupus erythematosus           Transesophageal echocardiography      Vaginosis, bacterial (BV), 332–333
        (SLE), 191, 198, 240–241,              (TEE), 7, 28, 32, 214         Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), ele-
        452, 472, 473, 483             Transient ischemic attack (TIA),              vated, 399
Systolic dysfunction, 3                        23, 32                        Varicella, 396, 397
                                       Transient tachypnea of the new-       Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), 66–
                                               born (TTN), 391                       67, 396, 397
T
                                       Transjugular intrahepatic portosys-   Vasa previa, 311
Tabes dorsalis, 290, 352                       temic shunt (TIPS), 149       Vascular claudication, 238
Takayasu’s arteritis, 6, 245           Transplant rejection, acute, 193      Venereal Disease Research Labora-
Tarasoff rule, 124                     Transthoracic echocardiography                tory (VDRL) test, 290, 352
Tardive dyskinesia, 427                        (TTE), 28, 214                Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mis-
Tay-Sachs disease, 393                 Traube’s sign, 9                              match, 436, 447
Telangiectasias, 237                   Trauma, nonaccidental, 360            Ventricular arrhythmia, sustained,
Temporal arteritis (TA), 6, 246        Traumatic urethral injury, 491                8
Tenosynovitis, 198                     Treponema pallidum, 337, 352          Ventricular ﬁbrillation, nonsus-
  ﬂexor, 222                           Trichomonas, 347                              tained, 26
Tension pneumothorax, 450–451          Trichomonas vaginalis, 323            Ventricular septal defect, 394, 398
Test validity, 119                     Trichophyton rubrum, 69                 nonrestrictive, 398
Test-retest reliability, 119           Tricuspid regurgitation, 33           Vertigo, 269
Testicular cancer, 490                 Tricuspid stenosis, 33                Viral exanthems, features of com-
Testicular mass, algorithm for eval-   Triiodothyronine (T3), 100                    mon, 397
        uation of, 490                 Trisomy 13 (Patau’s syndrome), 373    Virchow’s triad, 217, 447, 505
Testicular torsion, 516                Trisomy 18 (Edwards’ syndrome),       Viridans streptococci, 146, 214
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), 394                 373, 387                      Vitamin A, 309
Therapeutic privilege, 124             Trisomy 21, 372, 395                  Vitamin B12 deﬁciency, 252, 282–
Thiamine deﬁciency, 19, 522            Tuberculosis, 449, 454–455                    283
Thalassemias, 188–189                  Tuberous sclerosis (TS), 68, 267,     Vitamin D deﬁciency (osteomala-
Thrombocytopenia, 215                          486                                   cia), 90–91, 480

542
Vitamin D–secreting lymphomas,         Wegener’s granulomatosis, 456–        Woods screw, 319
       475                                    457, 472                       Wrist compression test, 222
Volume resuscitation, 13               Weight loss, adverse events associ-
Volvulus, 381                                 ated with, 115
Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome, 486        Wermer’s syndrome (MEN1), 86–         X
von Willebrand factor (vWF), 175,             87
                                                                             Xanthelasmas, 22
       194                             Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 404
                                                                             Xanthomas, 22
von Willebrand’s disease (vWD),        Wernicke’s encephalopathy, 404,
                                                                             Xeroderma pigmentosum, 70
       194, 399                               522–523
Vulvovaginal candidiasis, 357          West syndrome, 267
                                       Western blot, 202
                                                                             Z
                                       Wilms’ tumor, 399
W
                                       Wilson’s disease, 148, 160–161        Zidovudine, 196
WAGR syndrome, 399                     Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW)           Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 86, 87,
Warfarin, subtherapeutic levels, 190          syndrome, 40–41, 504                  151, 162

                                                                                                           543
 NOT E S

544
NOT E S

          545
 NOT ES

546
N OT ES

          547
 NOT E S

548
NOT E S

          549
 NOT E S

550
                        Tao Le, MD, MHS                        Elizabeth Eby Halvorson, MD

Tao Le, MD, MHS               Tao has been a well-recognized ﬁgure in medical education for the past 15 years. As
                              senior editor, he has led the expansion of First Aid into a global educational series. In
                              addition, he is the founder of the USMLERx online test bank series as well as a co-
                              founder of the Underground Clinical Vignettes series. As a medical student, he was
                              editor-in-chief of the University of California, San Francisco Synapse, a university news-
                              paper with a weekly circulation of 9000. Tao earned his medical degree from the Uni-
                              versity of California, San Francisco in 1996 and completed his residency training in in-
                              ternal medicine at Yale University and allergy and immunology fellowship training at
                              Johns Hopkins University. At Yale, he was a regular guest lecturer on the USMLE re-
                              view courses and an adviser to the Yale University School of Medicine curriculum com-
                              mittee. Tao subsequently went on to cofound Medsn and served as its chief medical
                              ofﬁcer. He is currently pursuing research in asthma education at the University of Lou-
                              isville.

Elizabeth Eby Halvorson, MD   Elizabeth is a pediatrics intern at Wake Forest who plans to subspecialize in infectious
                              disease, cardiology, or critical care. She worked on a previous First Aid project while in
                              medical school at Vanderbilt. Outside of school, Elizabeth enjoys running marathons,
                              cooking, and spending time with her pets. She is recently married to an orthopedic
                              surgery resident.

                              ABOUT THE AUTHORS


